Title: AlphaZeroBeta: Deep Reinforcement Learning for Market-Neutral Portfolios

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.18001v1

Published Time: Tue, 21 Jul 2026 02:16:08 GMT

Number of Pages: 59

Markdown Content:
# AlphaZeroBeta: Deep Reinforcement Learning for Market-Neutral Portfolios 

## Boris Belyakov 1* 

1* Department of Information Technology and Automated Systems, MIEM Faculty, HSE University, 11 Pokrovsky Bulvar, Moscow, 109028, Russia. Corresponding author(s). E-mail(s): work.belyakov@gmail.com; 

Abstract 

Market-neutral portfolios aim to generate consistent returns while offsetting sys-tematic market risk. Traditional approaches based on factor models or convex optimization often underperform during market regime shifts or when struc-tural assumptions break down. We propose AlphaZeroBeta, a deep reinforcement learning framework designed to deliver benchmark-relative alpha (excess returns) with near-zero beta (market neutrality). AlphaZeroBeta combines a composite reward function that balances risk-adjusted excess return, benchmark correlation, and transaction costs with a CNN-GRU policy trained end-to-end via Recurrent PPO and evaluated through a rolling walk-forward protocol. Backtests covering 2014–2024 across seven equity indices show that the model achieves higher Sharpe ratios than the baselines while maintaining near-zero benchmark correlations and competitive drawdowns. 

Keywords: Market-neutral portfolio; Reinforcement learning; Alpha; Beta; Portfolio optimization; Portfolio management 

1arXiv:2607.18001v1 [q-fin.PM] 20 Jul 2026 1 Introduction 

Financial markets are inherently noisy and unpredictable, yet exhibit persistent pat-terns that can be systematically exploited using quantitative techniques. The efficient market hypothesis (EMH) posits that prices fully reflect available information [21]; however, decades of empirical evidence reveal predictable anomalies such as momen-tum [36], excess volatility [61], and multifactor risk premia [22]. Market-neutral strategies, designed to isolate alpha (excess returns) while minimizing beta (system-atic risk), have therefore emerged as a cornerstone of hedge funds and quantitative trading desks [24, 52]. Despite their popularity, traditional market-neutral approaches face significant methodological and practical challenges: 1. Conventional implementations rely on static factor structures, such as the Fama– French family of models [22, 23], where exposures are assumed constant. However, factors themselves can become obsolete or attenuated as market regimes evolve, highlighting the limitations of static models and motivating dynamic alterna-tives [8]. 2. Statistical arbitrage models, particularly those employing high-dimensional regres-sions or machine learning, are prone to overfitting—capturing noise rather than signal—especially when historical data are limited. This problem has been docu-mented in both factor-based covariance estimation [2] and machine-learning-driven approaches to asset pricing [70]. 3. Many strategies lack explicit mechanisms to adapt to regime shifts, such as volatility clustering or macroeconomic shocks. Despite well-documented caveats of simple factor timing strategies [11], adaptive portfolio frameworks [43] show that dynamic adjustments, incorporating time-varying predictors, regime indicators, or tactical factor allocation, can improve resilience compared to static models. Deep reinforcement learning (DRL) combines sequential decision-making with function approximation, providing an alternative to static, factor-based approaches. By casting portfolio construction as a Markov decision process (MDP), DRL learns state-contingent rebalancing policies that optimize intertemporal objectives; in prac-tice, this supports dynamic risk management under frictions (e.g. transaction costs, exposure limits, and drawdown control) while exploiting time-varying structure in returns through representation learning over rolling training windows [1, 13, 37, 62, 65]. This study advances the literature through three principal contributions. 1. Introduction of AlphaZeroBeta, a deep reinforcement learning framework for the construction and management of market-neutral portfolios. 2. Proposal of a dynamic, risk-aware reward function and an explicit dollar-neutral projection that jointly enforce market neutrality while targeting benchmark-relative excess returns. 3. Provision of an empirical evaluation, employing historical equity data and bench-marking against both market indices and optimization models. 2Throughout this manuscript, “alpha” denotes residual returns relative to each benchmark index after accounting for standard risk factors; the model is not intended to capture a universal or economy-wide anomaly. The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 reviews the related lit-erature on market-neutral portfolios and reinforcement learning for trading. Section 3 details the architecture, reward, and MDP formulation. Section 4 describes the data and baselines. Section 5 reports compute requirements, evaluation metrics, and the walk-forward protocol. Section 6 presents empirical findings, robustness checks, and attribution analyses. Section 7 discusses implications and future work; Section 8 concludes. 

# 2 Literature Review 

## 2.1 Market-Neutral Portfolios 

Market-neutral investing is an established field in quantitative finance, with theoret-ical foundations, practical implementations, and empirical results spanning several decades. The original hedge fund, launched by Alfred W. Jones in 1949, sought to profit from stock selection while neutralizing market risk by combining long positions financed by short sales, with the long and short legs sized to offset overall market exposure. Patton [52] documents that standard industry definitions of equity market-neutral strategies center on this long–short construction for neutralizing systematic risks, and argues that these definitions are inadequate for the nonlinear payoffs typi-cal of hedge funds; he therefore proposes richer notions of neutrality (mean, variance, value-at-risk, and tail). The conceptual basis for market-neutral investing is grounded in multi-factor asset-pricing models. Fama and French [22] introduced a three-factor model show-ing that stock returns are explained by market excess return, size, and value factors. Carhart [15] extended this with a momentum factor defined by a self-financing portfolio long high-momentum stocks and short low-momentum stocks. The factor-mimicking portfolios are structured in long–short form, and hedging their associated exposures yields zero-beta portfolios. From a methodological perspective, classical approaches include regression-based factor-neutralization [5] and optimization techniques imposing zero-exposure con-straints [27, 47]. Relative-value strategies, most notably pairs trading, represent standard market-neutral approaches. Gatev, Goetzmann, and Rouwenhorst (2006) demonstrate that simple self-financing pairs trading strategies implemented on U.S. equities over the period 1962–2002 yield statistically and economically significant performance, with average annualized excess returns on the order of 11% [29]. Con-vertible bond arbitrage and merger arbitrage are other widely studied market-neutral techniques [33, 52]. Over the past decade, machine learning techniques have substantially broadened the methodological basis for statistical arbitrage. Krauss, Do, and Huck (2017) showed that deep neural networks, gradient-boosted trees, and random forests can systemat-ically generate profitable long–short portfolios on the S&P 500 [41]. Subsequent work extends this trend toward end-to-end deep learning for portfolio optimization [71] and 3reinforcement learning for trading [72]. The August 2007 quant deleveraging episode demonstrated that market-neutral books are not free of systematic risk in stressed regimes [38, 39], motivating an explicit, correlation-based neutrality penalty embedded directly in the reward function (Section 3.7) rather than reliance on factor cancellation alone. From a practical standpoint, a classical approach to constructing market-neutral portfolios relies on factor models to disentangle asset returns from broader mar-ket influences. For example, Avellaneda and Lee (2010) introduced a method that involves regressing individual stock returns on multiple factors, such as sector-specific and market-wide indices [5]. The goal of this methodology is to construct portfo-lios with zero net exposure to these factors, thereby achieving market neutrality. This regression-based framework reduces the complexity of portfolio construction by expressing asset returns through their factor loadings and enabling the development of portfolios that minimize systematic risk exposure. The mean-variance optimization framework introduced by Markowitz (1952) has also been adapted for constructing market-neutral portfolios [47]. For example, Gane-san (2011) applied this approach while imposing constraints to ensure zero exposure to systematic risk factors, using a subspace-decomposition analysis on a broad U.S. equity universe (roughly 2,000 NYSE/NASDAQ stocks, 1998–2010) [27]. The constraints kept the resulting portfolios market-neutral, demonstrating that optimization-based methods can sustain neutrality on large universes. A notable market-neutral strategy variation is pairs trading, where a portfolio consists of two assets: one held long and the other short. The goal is to exploit rela-tive price movements between the two, often under the assumption that their prices will converge or diverge in a predictable manner. Baronyan et al. (2010) compared fourteen pairs-trading strategies (combinations of seven trading rules and two pair-selection methods) and found that performance varies materially across configurations and regimes [9]. This dependence on strategy specification underscores that market neutrality admits multiple operationalizations and that the chosen criterion materially influences portfolio outcomes. Valle et al. (2014) propose a Mixed-Integer Nonlinear Program (MINLP) that constructs market-neutral portfolios by minimizing the absolute correlation between portfolio returns and a benchmark index, allowing both long and short positions [66]. Their formulation attains low (often near-zero) correlations and, evaluated against S&P international universes, outperforms both the underlying indices and a zero-beta baseline (minimizing the regression slope), as well as several existing market-neutral funds. Deep reinforcement learning, while still emerging in financial research, offers a framework for constructing market-neutral portfolios. The ability of DRL to learn optimal policies from market data makes it an attractive approach for portfolio man-agement. Unlike traditional regression-based methods, DRL algorithms can learn to optimize both risk and return without requiring explicit factor models. The growing body of literature on DRL for finance has demonstrated the potential of DRL for investment decision-making [49]. However, the application of DRL to market-neutral portfolios remains relatively unexplored. 4Our study advances the field of market-neutral portfolio construction by introduc-ing a DRL framework that bypasses traditional beta estimation and regression-based techniques. Instead, the agent learns to directly optimize portfolio weights while explic-itly projecting them to dollar-neutral at every step and using a correlation-aware reward to discourage residual beta. Building on prior research that relied on limited trading settings or asset universes, our method scales to portfolios with 500+ stocks by employing DRL techniques such as Recurrent Proximal Policy Optimization (Recurrent PPO) with Gated Recurrent Units (GRUs). This supports a dynamic, data-driven investing process that adjusts to changing market conditions without manual rebalancing or explicit factor modeling. 

## 2.2 Reinforcement Learning in Trading 

Reinforcement learning (RL) has been increasingly applied to finance, where it learns adaptively from sequential market interactions. Unlike traditional econometric and sta-tistical methods (e.g. SARIMAX, VAR), RL frameworks combine online learning with deep network architectures to handle the noise, non-stationarity, heavy-tailed distri-butions, and multi-participant dynamics that characterize financial data. As reviewed by Charpentier et al. (2023) and Huang et al. (2020), these methods continuously update policies as new data arrives, which suits them to markets that exhibit volatility clustering and abrupt regime shifts [16, 34]. The reinforcement learning literature broadly categorizes methods into model-free approaches, including actor-only, critic-only, and actor-critic frameworks. Compara-tive studies reviewed by Fischer (2018) report no significant performance differences between core algorithms such as Policy Gradient (PG) and Deep Q-Network (DQN) when applied to portfolio management [26]. However, each class of methods offers spe-cific strengths depending on the task setting [57]. MDP design choices materially affect agent performance. For example, augmenting a DRL portfolio allocator with market-sentiment features yields significantly higher Sharpe ratios and annualized returns than price-only baselines [40]. Evaluations in market making and portfolio optimization, as highlighted by Gaˇ sperov et al. (2021) and Hambly et al. (2023), consistently show that RL methods can manage larger action spaces more efficiently than manual optimization [28, 31]. Enhanced state representations tend to improve learning outcomes, though dimin-ishing returns are observed as feature space expands. In multi-asset scenarios, an expanded action space allows finer control over asset allocation, reducing the bur-den on human analysts. While most RL implementations continue to use portfolio return as the primary reward signal, recent research has introduced alternative objec-tives—such as risk-adjusted returns and multi-objective reward shaping—to better align with real-world portfolio management goals [6, 19, 50]. Simplified trading assumptions—such as neglecting transaction costs or assuming zero slippage—risk overestimating RL performance, emphasizing the need for rigorous models that incorporate these constraints [6]. AlphaZeroBeta addresses these challenges through a risk-aware reward function and dynamic policy adaptation tailored to the non-stationary structure of financial data. State representations combine volatility-adjusted features with cross-sectional 5normalization across sector and index peers, allowing the model to learn from heavy-tailed distributions and long-range dependencies without overfitting to transient market noise. 

## 2.3 State-of-the-Art Neural Architectures 

Choosing the recurrent backbone is crucial because market-neutral trading involves long, non-stationary sequences with sparse but impactful regime shifts. GRUs [18] share the gating mechanism of long short-term memory (LSTM) networks but use fewer parameters and have been competitive on time-series tasks. Transformer variants have been adapted to long-range memory (Transformer-XL [20]) and to reinforce-ment learning specifically (Gated Transformer-XL [51]), but Pleines et al. (2025) [55] show that GRU-based policies maintain stable performance on endless reinforcement learning tasks, whereas transformer variants suffer when memory must be updated continuously. Empirically, we observe the same behavior on financial data: GRUs han-dle the rolling multi-year training horizons used in our walk-forward protocol (see Section 5.4) with fewer parameters and more stable optimization, so we adopt a CNN-GRU encoder instead of a transformer stack. 

# 3 Methodology 

The AlphaZeroBeta architecture is structured around three core stages to achieve dynamic market-neutral portfolio optimization. An overview of the full system architecture is shown in Figure 1. 

## 3.1 Alpha Signal Construction 

In the first stage, heterogeneous financial data sources—including price histories, fundamental metrics, and sentiment indicators—are aggregated and transformed into a standardized set of alpha signals. These signals are engineered to capture a diverse range of market phenomena, including momentum, mean reversion, volatility clustering, and tail risk asymmetries. The resulting features are arranged into a multi-dimensional tensor that preserves both temporal and cross-sectional structure, serving as a unified input representation for the model. 

## 3.2 Feature Extraction via CNN-GRU 

The constructed signal tensor is then passed through a hybrid feature extractor composed of a CNN followed by a GRU. The CNN component extracts multi-scale temporal features through three 1D convolutional layers with hierarchical receptive fields. The GRU component then captures longer-range temporal dependencies and retains a compact memory of historical context. Together, these layers model complex non-linear patterns and stabilize performance across market regimes. 6Stock Prices 

Company Profiles 

Financial Statements 

Commodity Prices 

Stock Volumes 

Dividends & Splits 

Statement Analysis 

Forex Prices 

Social Sentiments 

Earnings Surprises 

Economics Data 

Index Values 

Data Loading 

Processing 

Aggregated Data 

1. Momentum (pct change) 2. Mean Reversion (-1*mean) 3. Volatility (std) 4. Skew / Jump (skew, kurtosis) 

Input Tensor 

Derive alpha signals 

Normalize across sectors / index 

Feature Engineering 

Modeling 

Simulated Live Feed 

Rolling 36-month training window, 6-month test slice, daily rebalancing, retrained per fold. 

RecurrentPPO (CnnGRU) 

Trading Agent 

Environment 

Observation, Ot

Action, AtReward, Rt

Market Orders + Slippage 

Trading Results 

Daily Portfolio Rebalancing + Commission 

Backtesting 

Fig. 1 AlphaZeroBeta architecture: a three-stage pipeline. Data Loading aggregates twelve het-erogeneous market and alternative data sources. Feature Engineering derives four alpha-signal families (momentum, mean reversion, volatility, and skew/jump) over rolling windows and normalizes them per sector and index into the input tensor. Backtesting formalizes the MDP loop: a Recur-rent PPO trading agent with a CNN-GRU encoder ingests the observation (tensor slice, historical weights, portfolio metrics), emits an action (asset weights), and receives a reward (the AlphaZero-Beta composite reward) from a transaction-cost-aware environment. 

73.3 Policy Learning with Recurrent PPO 

Extracted features are forwarded to a Recurrent PPO agent, an actor-critic algorithm based on PPO, extended for recurrent policies [54, 58, 64]. The agent outputs portfolio weights by optimizing a composite reward function designed to favor excess returns per unit of volatility while penalizing correlation with a benchmark index and transaction costs. Formally, at each decision step the PPO agent receives the scalar reward rt

defined in Eq. (8) in Subsection 3.7, which combines risk-adjusted excess return with explicit penalties for market correlation and turnover. This reward is used directly as the optimization objective in the policy gradient updates. 

## 3.4 Walk-Forward Evaluation 

To assess the model’s generalization and robustness, we run walk-forward backtests over the 2014–2024 period, reserving earlier years for training context. At the start of each split, we train the agent on a fixed-length historical window; we then deploy it on the subsequent out-of-sample period, ensuring non-overlapping train/test segments within each split. The procedure simulates daily trading operations and allows the model to adapt to regime shifts while limiting overfitting, providing validation under realistic, non-stationary market conditions. 

## 3.5 Problem Formulation as a Markov Decision Process 

We formalize market-neutral portfolio construction as a Markov decision process, defined by the tuple ( S, A, P, R, γ ), where S denotes the state space, A the action space, P the transition dynamics, R the reward function, and γ ∈ [0 , 1] the discount factor [65]. At time t, the environment is characterized by a state st ∈ S , which includes the current portfolio weights wt, global market signals mt (macroeconomic indicators, commodity prices, and broad market indices), and asset-specific features xt (price his-tory, fundamentals, and sentiment). A detailed taxonomy is provided in Appendix C. Formally, 

st = ( wt, mt, xt). (1) The agent selects an action at ∈ A corresponding to the target allocation wt+1 for the next period. To keep leverage bounded we restrict the weights to lie in an ℓ1 ball, 

∥wt+1 ∥1 ≤ τ , with τ = 1 in every experiment, and we subtract the cross-sectional mean of the action so that P 

> i

wi = 0 before the ℓ1 projection (see Listing D.4.2 in Appendix D.4). This combination enforces dollar neutrality at each rebalance while keeping gross exposure at most one. The state transition to st+1 follows a stochastic process governed by market evolution and rebalancing: 

st+1 ∼ P (· | st, a t). (2) The reward function R(st, a t) captures the agent’s objective, which balances return generation with risk control and neutrality preservation. 8The agent’s goal is to learn a policy π : S → A that maximizes the expected discounted cumulative reward: 

π∗ = arg max  

> π

Eπ

" TX

> t=0

γtrt

#

, (3) where rt = R(st, a t) denotes the immediate reward at time t [65]. 

## 3.6 Reinforcement Learning Architecture 

To optimize the policy πθ(at | st) in a Markov decision process, we employ Recur-rent PPO, an actor-critic algorithm characterized by stability and sample efficiency in continuous control tasks [54, 58]. The policy is parameterized by a deep neural architecture that processes raw market data and outputs portfolio allocations in a closed-loop, state-dependent setting. The input to the agent consists of multivariate financial time series, sampled at multiple temporal resolutions—specifically, daily, weekly, and monthly intervals—to encode both short-term fluctuations and long-term structural trends. Weekly and monthly tensors are constructed by resampling the daily panel using end-of-period values so that every observation shares the timestamp of the most recent daily close, ensuring synchronous alignment when the streams are concatenated. The multi-scale observations are then processed by a hierarchical convolutional pipeline, where three 1D convolutional layers apply progressively narrower filters of sizes 8, 4, and 3, with corresponding strides of 4, 2, and 1. The architecture extracts multi-scale temporal features across assets and indicators. The resulting feature map is then flattened and passed through a GRU with 512 hidden units. The GRU maintains temporal dependencies and encodes sequential patterns, providing a memory mechanism for evolving market dynamics. The recurrent embedding is then forwarded through two separate fully connected branches. Because the action dimension equals the number of tradable assets in each universe, including cases with more than 2,200 constituents (000001.SS), the final policy layer is a high-dimensional linear projection from the 512-unit embedding to the per-asset weight vector. During training we batch experiences along both the time and asset axes (i.e. minibatches contain 32–64 parallel environments, each representing a different index window) so that GPU matrix multiplications dominate the cost rather than per-asset loops. Inference remains tractable because the policy outputs a dense weight vector once per rebalance; sparsity is enforced afterward by projecting onto the ℓ1 ball, which naturally limits gross exposure without requiring explicit pruning. This design keeps runtime near-linear in the number of assets and allows the same PPO implementation to handle 500-name U.S. universes and the 2,200-name Shanghai panel with identical code. The two fully connected branches are: 1. a policy head that outputs the action vector at = wt+1 , representing the next-period portfolio weights, and 9Observation, Monthly     

> Observation, Weekly
> Observation, Daily
> Stacked input: 3 ×nfeatures ×nagent window
> Conv Filters: 32 Size: 8 Stride: 4
> Conv2 Filters: 64 Size: 4 Stride: 2
> Conv3 Filters: 64 Size: 3 Stride: 1
> Flattened
> GRU (512)
> Fully Connected (512)
> FC (512)
> FC (512)
> Value
> Policy

Fig. 2 AlphaZeroBeta neural architecture. Three multi-resolution observation tensors (daily, weekly, and monthly), each resampled at the same close, are stacked along the channel axis and processed by a sequential CNN (8/4/3 kernels, 4/2/1 strides, 32/64/64 filters). The flattened feature map feeds a GRU (512 hidden units) and a shared fully connected layer (512 units); the recurrent embedding then branches into a value head that outputs a scalar value estimate and a policy head that outputs an N-dimensional weight vector, where N is the universe size (e.g. 30 for the DJIA, 500 for the S&P 500, about 2,200 for the SSE Composite). Each head has a 512-unit ReLU hidden layer; the policy output is bounded by a Tanh. Trained end-to-end with Recurrent PPO. 

2. a value head that estimates Vϕ(st), the expected return-to-go from state st.Each head contains a 512-unit fully connected ReLU hidden layer followed by a head-specific output layer: a scalar for Vϕ(st) and an N -dimensional Tanh-bounded weight vector for wt+1 , where N is the universe size and varies by market (e.g. 30 for ˆDJI, 500 for ˆGSPC, ∼2,200 for 000001.SS). The entire network is trained end-to-end using PPO’s clipped surrogate objective, which balances policy improvement with trust-region constraints. Gradient updates are computed via backpropagation using minibatch stochastic gradient descent. The overall architecture is illustrated in Figure 2. 

## 3.7 Reward Function 

In reinforcement learning for portfolio optimization, the choice of reward function is critical: it determines which trade-offs the agent learns to make between return, risk, neutrality, and turnover. In AlphaZeroBeta we design the reward to encourage market-neutral excess returns with controlled volatility and realistic transaction costs, rather than pure return maximization. Let rp(t) and rm(t) denote the portfolio and benchmark (index) returns at time t,respectively. We first define the excess return ∆r(t) = rp(t) − rm(t), (4) which captures performance attributable to active decisions beyond passive index exposure. Because excess return in isolation does not account for risk, we normalize 10 by the portfolio’s rolling volatility σp(t) to obtain a Sharpe-like, risk-adjusted term 

R(0)  

> t

= ∆r(t)

σp(t) . (5) To promote market neutrality, we penalize correlation between the portfolio and the benchmark. Let Corr  rp(t), r m(t) denote the correlation between portfolio and benchmark returns, computed over a rolling window (e.g. 60 business days). We extend the reward to 

R(1)  

> t

= ∆r(t)

σp(t) − λ1 · Corr  rp(t), r m(t), (6) where λ1 ≥ 0 is a regularization coefficient controlling the strength of the neu-trality penalty. Larger values of λ1 push the policy toward lower beta and weaker co-movement with the index. Excessive turnover is undesirable both because it erodes returns via transaction costs and because it makes strategies harder to implement at scale. Let wi(t) denote the weight of asset i at time t. We approximate proportional transaction costs using 

Ct = X

> i

∆wi(t) , ∆wi(t) = wi(t) − wi(t − 1) , (7) which is proportional to portfolio turnover at each rebalance. This leads to the final reward 

Rt = rp(t) − rm(t)

σp(t) − λ1 · Corr  rp(t), r m(t) − λ2

X

> i

∆wi(t) , (8) where λ2 ≥ 0 controls the strength of the turnover penalty and can be calibrated to reflect typical cost levels in the underlying markets. In the RL formulation, we take rt := Rt as the instantaneous reward in the Markov decision process. Thus the agent maximizes the expected discounted sum EP  

> t

γtRt

,trading off (i) risk-adjusted excess return, (ii) market correlation, and (iii) trading intensity. Coefficients λ1 and λ2 are treated as hyperparameters and kept fixed across markets in our main experiments; their values and other key PPO settings are sum-marized in Appendix D.2.2. By construction, this objective encourages policies that generate market-neutral excess returns while maintaining controlled volatility and realistic turnover. Because the turnover penalty depends on the absolute change in weights, the envi-ronment becomes path-dependent: the reward earned at t is influenced by the entire sequence of past allocations through transaction costs. Each fold therefore starts from a flat, self-financing portfolio, and the agent must ramp up exposures sequentially. In practice we observe that portfolio weights converge toward their stationary distri-bution after roughly ten trading days; this short warm-up period is included in all reported metrics, but it also explains the small dip in performance evident at the beginning of each out-of-sample window. 11 4 Experiment Setup 

## 4.1 Data 

We conduct empirical evaluation on a dataset retrieved from Bloomberg Terminal and Financial Modeling Prep, covering calendar years 2004–2024 of historical equity and macro-financial data [12, 25]. The dataset comprises daily closing prices, trad-ing volumes, and corporate actions (e.g. dividends, stock splits), alongside detailed company-level fundamentals such as income statements, balance sheets, financial ratios, and sector classifications. Additionally, we include analyst-estimated earnings surprise signals, which capture deviations between expected and reported earnings and serve as a proxy for information shocks. Walk-forward experiments draw their training data from rolling three-year windows (approximately 756 trading days), fol-lowed by a six-month validation segment (about 126 days) used for early stopping and hyperparameter checks, and a six-month out-of-sample test segment. The block advances in six-month steps (sliding window): for the first fold, the model trains on July 2010–June 2013 (36 months), validates on July–December 2013, and tests on January–June 2014; the next fold shifts forward six months (train Jan-uary 2011–December 2013, validate January–June 2014, test July–December 2014), and so on. Because the six-month sliding step is shorter than the 36-month training win-dow, training windows overlap across folds (by 30 months between consecutive folds); the six-month validation and test slices advance disjointly, yielding K = 22 non-overlapping test segments through December 2024. The 2004–2010 segment is reserved for initialization of rolling estimators (volatility, correlation, and winsorization thresh-olds) and feature standardization statistics, so the first training window starts in July 2010 and no estimator state leaks across the in-sample/out-of-sample boundary. At the beginning of each fold, the agent’s network weights are reset and retrained from scratch on that fold’s training window; portfolio weights start from zero (flat position) and adapt dynamically during deployment. Unless otherwise noted, every descriptive statistic and inference in Sections 4 and 6 is computed on the 2014–2024 out-of-sample walk-forward window; the pre-2014 data only provide historical context for initializing each fold. To account for exogenous influences on asset returns, we incorporate a range of macroeconomic indicators—including interest rates, inflation metrics, GDP growth rates, and employment figures—alongside global commodity prices, foreign exchange rates, and investor sentiment signals derived from structured news feeds, social media analytics, insider trading, and options data. These features enrich the state repre-sentation with both fundamental and behavioral dimensions of market dynamics. A full taxonomy of input features retrieved from Bloomberg Terminal is provided in Table C2. The core equity universe of our study is composed of seven major stock indices, summarized in Table 1. These indices span a diverse set of regions—including North America, Europe, and Asia—and capture both developed and emerging markets. Two universes (the SSE Composite with more than 2,200 stocks and the S&P 500 with 500 constituents) meet or exceed the 500-name threshold, so the agent operates over 12 Table 1 Overview of equity indices used in the empirical study. Indices vary by region, coverage, and rebalancing conventions. 

Code Name Region Size Curr. Notes 

000001.SS SSE Com-posite China >2,200 CNY Comprehensive index tracking all A- and B-shares listed on the Shanghai Stock Exchange; used as a proxy for Chinese market breadth. ˆDJI Dow Jones Ind. Avg U.S. 30 USD Price-weighted index of 30 U.S. blue-chip companies; oldest and most concentrated benchmark in the study, with infrequent con-stituent changes. ˆFTSE FTSE 100 U.K. 100 GBP Tracks the 100 largest companies on the London Stock Exchange by market capitalization; rebalanced quarterly; sector-heavy in energy and financials. ˆGDAXI DAX Germany 40 EUR Comprises 40 major German com-panies trading on Xetra; free-float adjusted; used as the flagship index for the Eurozone’s largest econ-omy. ˆGSPC S&P 500 U.S. 500 USD Broad-based index of large-cap U.S. equities; represents 80% of total U.S. market cap; free-float weighted and rebalanced quarterly. ˆHSI Hang Seng Hong Kong SAR, China 83 HKD Captures the largest and most liquid companies on the Hong Kong Stock Exchange (Hong Kong SAR, China); rebalanced quar-terly; includes dual-listed main-land firms. ˆNDX NASDAQ-100 U.S. 100 USD Tech-focused index of the largest non-financial NASDAQ-listed firms; uses modified capitalization weighting to reduce dominance of megacaps. Note: Index metadata retrieved from Bloomberg Terminal. “Curr.” denotes index currency. 

13 a large cross-section on those markets. Their inclusion ensures exposure to a variety of liquidity regimes, market structures, and economic conditions. Each index reflects distinct weighting methodologies. For example, the S&P 500 and FTSE 100 are free-float market capitalization weighted, offering broad exposure to large-cap equities in the U.S. and U.K., respectively. The DAX and Hang Seng indices also follow cap-weighted schemes but represent concentrated baskets of domestic blue-chip firms. In contrast, the Dow Jones Industrial Average (DJIA) is price-weighted, while the NASDAQ-100 uses a modified capitalization approach to reduce concentra-tion risk in the tech-heavy composition. The SSE Composite, representing nearly the entire Chinese stock market, updates daily and captures high-frequency volatility in an emerging market context. Index sizes range from as few as 30 constituents (DJIA) to more than 2,200 (SSE Composite), and rebalance schedules vary from quarterly to irregular intervals. This diversity lets us evaluate the scalability and generalization of our approach across varying breadth, turnover dynamics, and market microstructures. Furthermore, index-level and constituent-level data—such as returns, prices, volumes, and corporate actions—are integrated into the model’s state space and bench-marking logic. For ˆGSPC, ˆNDX, ˆFTSE, ˆGDAXI, ˆHSI, and ˆDJI, Bloomberg historical membership feeds are available and we therefore use time-varying constituent sets within each walk-forward split. For 000001.SS, historical constituent history is incomplete in our licensed feed, so we use a fixed Bloomberg constituent snapshot as of 2025-02-01 as a proxy universe. Table 3 summarizes this treatment. Indices that meet or exceed the 500-name threshold (SSE Composite exceeds; S&P 500 meets) there-fore force the agent to optimize over very large cross-sections, confirming the intended scaling regime. Training and evaluating across this geographically diverse index panel exposes the method to heterogeneous liquidity regimes, sectoral compositions, market capitalizations, and rebalancing schedules. 

4.1.1 Descriptive Statistics 

To characterize the distributional properties of the underlying equity markets, we report standard summary statistics for daily log returns of each benchmark index in Table 2. Consistent with the walk-forward protocol, these descriptive statistics (and all downstream inferences that reference them) are computed exclusively on the 2014– 2024 out-of-sample evaluation window; pre-2014 observations merely provide training context and never enter the table. For each series we list the number of observa-tions ( N ), mean and median return, standard deviation, extrema, skewness, excess kurtosis (fourth standardized moment minus three, so that a normal distribution has excess kurtosis = 0), and the p-value of a Jarque–Bera normality test. This provides a compact view of the heavy tails and volatility clustering that are typical of equity returns and motivates the use of risk-aware performance measures in our reinforcement learning framework. Mean daily returns are small and mostly mildly positive (ˆHSI is essentially flat at 

−0.00001), with markedly fat-tailed and consistently left-skewed distributions; Jarque– Bera tests reject normality at any conventional significance level even when computed strictly on the 2014–2024 out-of-sample horizon. A standard Engle ARCH LM test (not 14 Table 2 Descriptive statistics of daily log returns for the benchmark indices over the 2014–2024 walk-forward evaluation window. “JB p” reports the p-value of a Jarque–Bera test for normality. All returns are expressed in the local index currency. 

Index N Mean Median Std Min Max Skew Ex. Kurt. JB p

000001.SS 2708 0.00017 0.00047 0.01298 -0.08873 0.07755 -1.008 8.319 < 0.001 ˆDJI 2797 0.00036 0.00066 0.01074 -0.13842 0.10764 -0.945 23.322 < 0.001 ˆFTSE 2814 0.00009 0.00054 0.00967 -0.11512 0.08667 -0.870 13.364 < 0.001 ˆGDAXI 2820 0.00031 0.00080 0.01195 -0.13055 0.10414 -0.591 10.293 < 0.001 ˆGSPC 2797 0.00043 0.00067 0.01093 -0.12765 0.08968 -0.812 16.111 < 0.001 ˆHSI 2742 -0.00001 0.00026 0.01330 -0.09879 0.08693 -0.019 3.776 < 0.001 ˆNDX 2797 0.00065 0.00117 0.01352 -0.13003 0.09597 -0.537 7.361 < 0.001 

tabulated) further indicates pronounced conditional heteroscedasticity for all indices, consistent with well-known stylized facts such as volatility clustering in equity markets. 

## 4.2 Data Handling and Look-Ahead Bias 

To ensure that the backtests are implementable in real time and free from artificial information leakage, we align all predictors so that only information available at (or before) the portfolio-formation date is used. 

4.2.1 Company Fundamentals 

Quarterly and annual financial statement data (income statements, balance sheets, and cash-flow statements) obtained from Bloomberg Terminal and Financial Modeling Prep are lagged to reflect realistic reporting delays [12, 25]. Concretely, we assume that each statement becomes tradable information only after a fixed lag of 60 calendar days following the period end; all fundamental features are shifted accordingly, so that values released for quarter q first enter the feature set in the subsequent period. 

4.2.2 Earnings and Analyst Forecasts 

Earnings surprises and analyst forecast revisions are constructed so that only contemporaneously available estimates enter the state. To avoid look-ahead bias from backfilled analyst databases, we treat revisions as occurring at their recorded announcement dates and do not use future revisions when computing past signals. Earnings announcements that occur after the market close can only affect trading decisions from the next business day onward. 

4.2.3 Macroeconomic and Survey Data 

Macroeconomic indicators (e.g. interest rates, inflation measures, industrial produc-tion, and unemployment) are used at a monthly or quarterly frequency and are aligned to their official release dates. Where real-time vintages are not available, we conserva-tively lag macro variables by one publication period so that revisions cannot influence earlier decisions. 15 4.2.4 Index Constituents and Survivorship 

Index membership, corporate actions, and free-float shares are sourced from Bloomberg. Table 3 lists the exact membership treatment by index. Historical time-varying membership sets are used for ˆGSPC, ˆNDX, ˆFTSE, ˆGDAXI, ˆHSI, and ˆDJI. For 000001.SS, where full historical constituent history is not available in our licensed extract, we use the published constituent snapshot as of 2025-02-01 as a fixed proxy universe; this is the main survivorship-bias caveat in our setup.                 

> Table 3 Index-membership sourcing and survivorship treatment used in backtests.
> Index Membership mode Timestamp / note
> 000001.SS Static proxy Bloomberg constituent snapshot as of 2025-02-01. ˆGSPC Time-varying Bloomberg constituent history queried by trading date. ˆNDX Time-varying Bloomberg constituent history queried by trading date. ˆFTSE Time-varying Bloomberg constituent history queried by trading date. ˆGDAXI Time-varying Bloomberg constituent history queried by trading date. ˆHSI Time-varying Bloomberg constituent history queried by trading date. ˆDJI Time-varying Bloomberg constituent history queried by trading date.

4.2.5 Trading Calendars and Holidays 

All time series are aligned to exchange-specific trading calendars: non-trading days are removed rather than forward-filled, and each market is processed on its own local calen-dar. This avoids spurious returns on holidays and ensures that cross-market features do not inadvertently incorporate future information through asynchronous closing times. 

4.2.6 Close-to-Close Trading Rule 

Our main experiments assume a daily rebalancing scheme in which information up to and including day t is used to set portfolio weights for the next trading day 

t+1, implying execution at (or near) the close of t+1. Transaction costs use a deter-ministic schedule: 5 bps per side for top-decile U.S. names (ˆGSPC/ˆNDX/ˆDJI), 10 bps for top-decile names in the U.K., Germany, and Hong Kong SAR, China (ˆFTSE/ˆGDAXI/ˆHSI), 15 bps for the remaining U.S./U.K./German names, 20 bps for the remaining Hang Seng names, and 30 bps for 000001.SS constituents. Top decile is defined by trailing 60-trading-day average dollar volume (ADV 60 = price × volume) within each index universe, computed with information available up to the rebalance 16 date and refreshed monthly (first rebalance day of each month). Borrow fees are 30 bps/year (U.S.), 45 bps/year (U.K./Germany), 75 bps/year (Hong Kong SAR, China), and 120 bps/year (China), accrued linearly over holding days. The exact constants are listed in Table D4 (Appendix D.2.1). These charges are debited on every rebalance so that the close-to-close convention reflects adverse drift associated with delayed fills. 

## 4.3 Baselines 

We benchmark AlphaZeroBeta against three portfolio strategies, each based on a different optimization methodology. 

4.3.1 Index Buy-and-Hold (Index B&H) 

The passive benchmark maintains the initial allocation unchanged over the entire evaluation period: 

wi(t) = wi(0) , ∀t, (9) where wi(t) denotes the portfolio weight of asset i at time t. The benchmark provides a baseline for market-tracking performance [53]. 

4.3.2 Maximum Sharpe Ratio Portfolio (MxSharpe) 

The procedure is formulated to maximize the portfolio’s Sharpe ratio subject to linear constraints: max 

> w

E[Rp − Rf ]

σp

s.t. X

> i

wi = 1 , −1 ≤ wi ≤ 1, (10) where Rp = w⊤R is the portfolio return and σp = √w⊤Σw denotes portfolio volatil-ity. The mean–variance formulation follows [47]; the resulting program is solved via Sequential Least Squares Programming (SLSQP), which handles the nonlinear Sharpe ratio objective subject to the box and full-investment constraints. 

4.3.3 Minimal Correlation Portfolio (Decorr) 

The strategy minimizes the absolute correlation with the benchmark index to drive the portfolio toward ρp ≈ 0 rather than ρp → − 1: min  

> w

|ρp| = Cov( Rp, R b)

σpσb

s.t. X

> i

wi = 1 , −1 ≤ wi ≤ 1, (11) where Rb is the benchmark return. Because |ρp| is non-smooth at zero, in practice we solve the equivalent smooth program min w ρ2 

> p

with SLSQP, which yields the same optimizer and ensures feasible allocations with bounded leverage and full investment. These three benchmarks span the most common convex constructions used in practice—passive, Sharpe-optimal, and decorrelated—and therefore provide an apples-to-apples reference for AlphaZeroBeta’s performance in both absolute and relative terms. 17 The baselines and AlphaZeroBeta differ in one important respect: their constraint sets. All convex baselines use the same box constraints ( −1 ≤ wi ≤ 1) together with a full-investment condition P 

> i

wi = 1, so their net exposure is always long one dollar. They therefore remain sensitive to market beta unless neutrality emerges implicitly from the optimizer (only the Decorr formulation indirectly pushes toward low cor-relation). For AlphaZeroBeta we impose the identical per-asset bounds, project the centered policy outputs onto the ℓ1 ball of radius one, and therefore enforce both P 

> i

wi = 0 and P 

> i

|wi| ≤ 1 at every rebalance (Listing D.4.2). The correlation penalty in Eq. (8) still matters—it discourages residual beta after transaction costs—but neutrality is hard-coded rather than emergent. This fundamental difference in constraints means the comparison favors baselines in upward-trending markets (they retain positive beta) while AlphaZeroBeta must generate performance solely from relative-value signals. The comparison is leverage-neutral in terms of gross exposure yet differs in net exposure: baselines are net-long by design, whereas AlphaZeroBeta is dollar-neutral by construction. This limitation should be considered when interpreting performance comparisons in Section 6. To verify that our advantages are not solely attributable to using RL, we also report an ablation in Table B1 (Appendix B) that removes the neutrality penalty from the policy reward while leaving the architecture and training schedule unchanged. The return-maximizing RL baseline outperforms the passive index in every market but falls short of AlphaZeroBeta on Sharpe ratio and exhibits materially higher market correlations and deeper drawdowns, confirming that AlphaZeroBeta’s neutrality-aware formulation, rather than RL alone, drives the improvements highlighted in Section 6. 

## 4.4 Sample Efficiency and Overfitting Mitigation 

Our framework improves sample efficiency and mitigates overfitting by exploiting the structure of financial markets rather than relying on synthetic data. We employ three techniques: 1. At each time step, the state representation incorporates both index-level variables (e.g. returns, prices, realized volatility) and constituent-level features for every member of the traded universe (2,200 Shanghai stocks, 500 S&P constituents, 100 FTSE names, etc.). This expansion increases the effective sample size by treating each asset as a distinct learning signal, thereby enhancing statistical power and reducing the likelihood of overfitting to idiosyncratic noise. 2. We implement a rolling-window (moving-window) evaluation scheme with overlap-ping training windows across folds and disjoint validation/test slices [7]. For each split, the agent is trained on a fixed-length historical segment, validated on a held-out portion of that segment for hyperparameter tuning and early stopping, and then tested strictly on the subsequent out-of-sample period. This design exposes the agent to heterogeneous market regimes (bull, bear, sideways) and ensures that all performance metrics reflect unseen data. Profit-and-loss plots and all tabulated results are computed exclusively on out-of-sample periods, excluding the training and validation segments. 18 3. Standard machine learning techniques, including dropout [63], weight decay [42], and early stopping [56], are applied during training. These methods constrain model complexity and prevent memorization of training noise, further improving generalization to unseen data. We rely solely on historical market data for both training and evaluation. No synthetic data generators or artificial perturbations are employed, ensuring that all observed behaviors and performance metrics are grounded in real market dynamics. 

# 5 Compute and Evaluation Protocol 

This section consolidates the experimental infrastructure used in the empirical study: hardware and runtime requirements, evaluation metrics, and the walk-forward val-idation scheme (Section 5.4). All performance metrics (PnL charts and tables) are evaluated strictly on the out-of-sample test windows defined by the walk-forward protocol. 

## 5.1 Hardware 

Training and validation were executed on a server-class GPU machine (Linux, CUDA-enabled), comparable to an NVIDIA DGX A100 system (8 ×A100 GPUs, server-grade CPUs, high-bandwidth NVLink interconnect) or, for single-GPU ablations, a cloud instance with one datacenter GPU (e.g. AWS p3.2xlarge : 1 ×V100 16 GB, 8 vCPUs, 61 GiB RAM). These platforms are representative of hardware commonly used in contemporary DRL-for-finance workloads and documented in vendor benchmark guides. 

## 5.2 Accounting of Compute 

5.2.1 AlphaZeroBeta 

The agent is trained from scratch at each walk-forward fold and evaluated on the subsequent out-of-sample segment. The minimum hardware requirement is one datacenter-grade GPU of the V100/A100 class with at least 16 GB of VRAM and eight CPU cores; additional GPUs enable fold- and seed-level parallelism. On the reference single-GPU setup (AWS p3.2xlarge , 1 ×V100 16 GB), one complete train/validation cycle takes 2.6 ± 0.3 hours for the smaller universes (ˆDJI/ˆGDAXI/ˆHSI/ˆFTSE/ˆNDX, ranging from 30 to 100 names) and the 500-name ˆGSPC, and 4 .8 ± 0.5 hours for the 2,200-name SSE Composite. On an 8 ×A100 DGX-class node, running one fold per GPU reduces the per-fold wall-clock to 1 .1 and 2.0 hours, respectively. Aggregating across the K = 22 rolling splits (Jan 2014–Dec 2024), a single-seed sweep over all 22 folds of one index takes 57–106 h on a single V100 (about 2.4–4.4 wall-clock days, depending on universe size) or 3–6 h on the 8 ×A100 node when the 22 folds are spread one-per-GPU across the eight A100s. For exploratory single-seed studies we budget approximately one week of training per index on a single V100-equivalent GPU, so a single-seed pass over all seven indices takes on the order of two months end-to-end. The full evaluation reported in this paper 19 uses nine independent seeds per fold and is therefore run on the 8 ×A100 DGX-class node, where parallelized folds and seeds complete the entire seven-index, nine-seed sweep in approximately 12 days of wall-clock time. 

5.2.2 Benchmarks (Index B&H, MxSharpe, Decorr) 

All three baselines are CPU-bound and entail low computational overhead: 1. Index B&H is a trivial vectorized backtest in O(T N ) complexity. 2. MxSharpe and Decorr are smooth nonlinear programs per rebalance (MxSharpe maximizes a ratio of mean to volatility; Decorr minimizes squared benchmark cor-relation), each with linear box and budget constraints and solved with SLSQP; for 

N ∼ O (10 2−10 3) assets and typical rebalance grids, per-window solves complete in seconds, so full walk-forward backtests over multiple indices comfortably fit within 

≤1 day on a modern multi-core CPU. 

## 5.3 Evaluation Metrics 

To assess portfolio performance we report six metrics, grouped by role. Three are used for tabular comparison across methods: the Sharpe ratio (risk-adjusted return), the Pearson correlation with the benchmark (neutrality diagnostic), and the maximum drawdown (downside-risk measure) [46, 53, 59]. Three are used for visual diagnostics in the PnL charts: cumulative return, net exposure (long minus short), and gross exposure (long plus short). 

5.3.1 Sharpe Ratio 

The Sharpe ratio S measures the excess return per unit of volatility: 

S = E[Rp − Rf ]

σp

, (12) where Rp is the portfolio return, Rf is the risk-free rate, and σp is the standard devi-ation of Rp. A higher Sharpe ratio indicates superior risk-adjusted performance [60]. In all reported results we use daily excess returns over the effective federal funds rate (lagged to avoid look-ahead), and we annualize Sharpe by multiplying the daily estimate by √252. 

5.3.2 Correlation with Benchmark 

The Pearson correlation ρ between portfolio returns Rp and benchmark returns Rb is defined as: 

ρ = Cov( Rp, R b)

σpσb

, (13) where σp and σb are the respective standard deviations. This metric evaluates the degree of market neutrality; lower values imply greater independence from the index [52]. 20 5.3.3 Maximum Drawdown 

Maximum drawdown (MDD) quantifies the largest historical peak-to-trough loss during the investment horizon: MDD = min  

> t∈[0 ,T ]

 Vt − Vmax 

Vmax 



, (14) where Vt is the portfolio value at time t and Vmax = max τ ≤t Vτ is the run-ning maximum. MDD provides a measure of capital risk under worst-case historical scenarios [17]. 

5.3.4 Cumulative Return 

Cumulative return measures the total profit or loss accrued over time without account-ing for risk. It is computed as the cumulative sum of portfolio-level profit and loss: 

Ct =

> t

X

> s=1

∆Ps, (15) where ∆ Ps denotes the change in portfolio value at time s, computed as the inner product of asset price changes and lagged position sizes. The statistic Ct serves as a raw indicator of strategy performance over the investment horizon [14]. 

5.3.5 Market Value (Net Exposure) 

Net exposure reflects the portfolio’s directional market stance. At time t, it is defined as: 

Enet  

> t

=

> N

X

> i=1

pi,t · qi,t , (16) where pi,t is the price of asset i and qi,t is the signed quantity held. Positive values indicate long exposure; negative values indicate short positioning [30]. 

5.3.6 Gross Value (Gross Exposure) 

Gross exposure captures the total capital deployed, regardless of position direction: 

Egross  

> t

=

> N

X

> i=1

pi,t · | qi,t |. (17) This metric reflects leverage and portfolio scale, and is critical for risk and margin evaluation in long–short and market-neutral strategies [3]. Note: All metrics are computed assuming an initial capital base of 1 unit in the bench-mark index’s currency (e.g. $1), with method-specific exposure constraints applied at each rebalancing date and no external cash flows. 21 5.4 Walk-Forward Validation 

The walk-forward validation protocol introduced in Section 4 ensures robust general-ization and prevents temporal leakage. During the out-of-sample phase we simulate daily rebalancing with the deterministic transaction-cost and borrow-fee schedule reported in Table D4, always using information available up to each decision point. Each of the K = 22 walk-forward folds (Section 4) consists of a 36-month training window, a 6-month validation window used for early stopping and model selection, and a non-overlapping 6-month test window over which performance is reported. The block advances in 6-month steps, so consecutive training windows overlap by 30 months while the validation and test slices advance disjointly. The 22 test windows tile January 2014 through December 2024 without overlap, providing a synchronized evaluation hori-zon across markets with heterogeneous holiday calendars; pre-2014 data are reserved exclusively for warm-up of rolling estimators (Section 4) and never enter the reported metrics. The cumulative profit-and-loss (PnL) chart (Figure 4) and the performance met-rics in Table 4—annualized Sharpe ratio, maximum drawdown, and correlation to the benchmark index—are computed over the 22 out-of-sample test windows. Unless stated otherwise, we report mean ± standard deviation across the Cartesian product of the K = 22 folds and nine independent RL initializations per fold (different ran-dom seeds for the policy and value networks under identical hyperparameters), so the dispersion columns capture both temporal variability and sensitivity to agent restarts. This design emphasizes generalization across time and mitigates overfitting to specific market regimes [32]. 

# 6 Results 

Table 4 summarizes the comparative performance of AlphaZeroBeta across the seven equity benchmarks described in Table 1, using the 2014–2024 out-of-sample segments generated by the walk-forward procedure. AlphaZeroBeta is evaluated against three reference strategies: 1. Index B&H : A passive buy-and-hold strategy on the benchmark index, represent-ing the baseline market exposure. 2. Decorr : A constrained optimization strategy that minimizes correlation with the benchmark index. 3. MxSharpe : A return-risk optimized strategy that maximizes the Sharpe ratio without imposing market neutrality constraints. On average AlphaZeroBeta delivers a Sharpe ratio of 1 .25 (cross-market standard deviation 0 .30), computed as the simple mean and standard deviation of the per-market entries in Table 4; the best convex baseline in each market averages 0 .70 (standard deviation 0 .19). AlphaZeroBeta also maintains correlations within ±0.15 of zero in every region. Our method achieves the highest Sharpe ratio in all markets, suggesting superior risk-adjusted performance. Drawdown is competitive but not uniformly best: AlphaZe-roBeta has the smallest (most positive) maximum drawdown only on ˆGDAXI, while 22 Table 4 Performance comparison across methods. For each index, we highlight in bold: the best Sharpe ratio (highest), best max drawdown (closest to zero), and lowest absolute correlation. 

Index Method Sharpe ratio Max drawdown Correlation 

000001.SS 

AlphaZeroBeta 1.63 ± 0.38 -0.34 ± 0.11 -0.02 ± 0.05 

Index B&H 0.30 ± 0.00 -0.71 ± 0.00 1.00 ± 0.00 Decorr -0.24 ± 0.20 -0.24 ± 0.08 -0.05 ± 0.21 MxSharpe 0.80 ± 0.26 -0.63 ± 0.36 0.89 ± 0.09 ˆFTSE 

AlphaZeroBeta 0.94 ± 0.19 -0.28 ± 0.09 -0.02 ± 0.08 

Index B&H 0.23 ± 0.00 -0.43 ± 0.00 1.00 ± 0.00 Decorr -0.07 ± 0.18 -0.44 ± 0.07 -0.02 ± 0.17 MxSharpe 0.37 ± 0.16 -0.22 ± 0.20 0.73 ± 0.21 ˆGDAXI 

AlphaZeroBeta 0.86 ± 0.23 -0.16 ± 0.11 0.05 ± 0.04 

Index B&H 0.51 ± 0.00 -0.57 ± 0.00 1.00 ± 0.00 Decorr -0.16 ± 0.17 -0.49 ± 0.12 -0.10 ± 0.23 MxSharpe 0.11 ± 0.25 -0.28 ± 0.21 0.44 ± 0.35 ˆGSPC 

AlphaZeroBeta 1.61 ± 0.48 -0.26 ± 0.15 0.15 ± 0.09 Index B&H 0.72 ± 0.00 -0.67 ± 0.00 1.00 ± 0.00 Decorr -0.27 ± 0.17 -0.88 ± 0.14 -0.11 ± 0.19 

MxSharpe 0.91 ± 0.44 -0.09 ± 0.31 0.92 ± 0.07 ˆHSI 

AlphaZeroBeta 1.04 ± 0.33 -0.21 ± 0.22 0.01 ± 0.04 

Index B&H 0.10 ± 0.00 -0.67 ± 0.00 1.00 ± 0.00 Decorr -0.19 ± 0.18 -0.63 ± 0.16 -0.07 ± 0.18 MxSharpe 0.62 ± 0.31 -0.18 ± 0.27 0.81 ± 0.13 ˆNDX 

AlphaZeroBeta 1.48 ± 0.41 -0.32 ± 0.10 0.07 ± 0.06 

Index B&H 0.90 ± 0.00 -0.75 ± 0.00 1.00 ± 0.00 Decorr -0.12 ± 0.15 -0.53 ± 0.13 -0.08 ± 0.22 MxSharpe 0.85 ± 0.37 -0.19 ± 0.26 0.86 ± 0.11 ˆDJI 

AlphaZeroBeta 1.20 ± 0.28 -0.27 ± 0.14 0.03 ± 0.07 

Index B&H 0.58 ± 0.00 -0.53 ± 0.00 1.00 ± 0.00 Decorr -0.18 ± 0.19 -0.46 ± 0.11 -0.06 ± 0.15 MxSharpe 0.76 ± 0.29 -0.22 ± 0.24 0.79 ± 0.13 Note: Results are expressed as mean ± standard deviation. For AlphaZeroBeta, dispersion is com-puted across the Cartesian product of 22 walk-forward folds and nine independent RL agent initializations per fold (198 samples). Index B&H reports a single buy-and-hold path computed over the full 2014–2024 horizon and therefore has zero dispersion. Decorr and MxSharpe are deterministic per fold; their reported dispersion captures fold-to-fold variation across the 22 walk-forward windows (no agent-restart variation, because the optimizers are deterministic). Bold entries highlight the best Sharpe ratio (highest), best max drawdown (closest to zero), and lowest absolute correlation for each index. 

23 MxSharpe or Decorr record less-severe drawdowns in the other markets (numbers are reported as negative fractions of peak equity). In highly liquid indices such as the S&P 500 (ˆGSPC) and Nasdaq-100 (ˆNDX), AlphaZeroBeta achieves Sharpe ratios of 1.61 and 1.48, respectively—substantially outperforming benchmarks. The low or near-zero correlation with the corresponding index B&H further confirms that our strategy learns non-trivial return structures, providing strong orthogonality to passive exposure. In some cases, such as 000001.SS and ˆFTSE, the realized correlation is slightly negative or indistinguishable from zero, indicating that the soft correlation penalty in the reward suffices to neutralize residual beta without requiring a hard zero-correlation constraint. The occasional underperformance of the ex-ante maximum-Sharpe (MxSharpe) portfolio arises from the sensitivity of mean–variance optimization to estimation noise and non-stationary return moments. As a result, the theoretically optimal in-sample weights degrade out-of-sample, particularly in indices with unstable covariance structure or high concentration such as ˆGDAXI and ˆNDX. The convex baselines remain fully invested and net long, whereas AlphaZeroBeta is dollar-neutral by construction (zero-sum weights with an ℓ1-projection). The com-parison therefore favors the baselines whenever the underlying index trends upward because they retain positive beta, while AlphaZeroBeta must generate performance from relative-value signals alone. Decorr partially mitigates this imbalance by minimiz-ing realized correlation, yet even that formulation lacks an explicit zero-sum constraint. The fact that AlphaZeroBeta still outperforms highlights that its hard neutrality con-straint plus the neutrality-aware reward prevent beta drift without sacrificing Sharpe ratio. Transaction costs and borrow fees follow the deterministic schedule reported in Table D4. Under this schedule the realized absolute turnover P 

> i

|∆wi| for AlphaZe-roBeta averages 0 .56 ± 0.11 per rebalance across markets (95th percentile 0 .92), translating into an all-in implementation cost of roughly 8–12 bps per day in the most active windows. These magnitudes indicate that the reward penalty produces realis-tic trading intensity while leaving ample headroom for net alpha after frictions. The identical slippage/borrow model is applied to every strategy—Index B&H, Decorr, MxSharpe, and AlphaZeroBeta—with costs debited on each rebalance (buy-and-hold only pays when index membership changes). All four strategies rebalance at the same daily frequency, so they incur comparable per-rebalance costs under this model: the mean turnover is ≈ 0.50 for Decorr and ≈ 0.47 for MxSharpe across markets (not tab-ulated separately), against 0 .56 for AlphaZeroBeta noted above. All reported Sharpe ratios and drawdowns are net of these cost assumptions. To isolate the effect of AlphaZeroBeta’s neutrality-aware reward design, Appendix B benchmarks the full agent against an otherwise identical RL policy that removes the correlation penalty and simply maximizes risk-adjusted return. The abla-tion achieves Sharpe ratios above the passive index in every market but exhibits materially higher drawdowns and market correlations, underscoring the importance of explicit neutrality regularization. 24 6.1 Stability and Generalization 

The per-market dispersions in Table 4 reflect AlphaZeroBeta’s stability across walk-forward folds and agent restarts; the modest cross-market spread (Sharpe std 0 .30) and the consistently near-zero correlations together suggest that the policy generalizes across heterogeneous regimes—from developed markets such as ˆGDAXI to emerging markets such as 000001.SS—rather than fitting to a particular geography.       

> 010 k20 k30 k
> −0.06
> −0.05
> −0.04
> −0.03
> −0.02
> Optimization step
> Policy gradient loss
> 010 k20 k30 k
> −20
> −10
> 0
> 1

R2 ≈ 0.97  

> Optimization step
> Explained variance  R2
> Fig. 3 Training diagnostics across nine independent PPO runs on the S&P 500 reference market: (left) policy gradient loss convergence over the optimization horizon; (right) explained variance of the value function over training steps. Thin blue lines: per-seed trajectories; thick black line: cross-seed mean.

Figure 3 presents training diagnostics for AlphaZeroBeta across nine independently seeded PPO runs. The left panel shows the policy gradient loss stabilizing as training progresses, with convergence behavior consistent across all seeds. The variation in early training smooths out after 20k steps, suggesting reliable optimization behavior across random initializations. The right panel reports explained variance, which measures how well the critic pre-dicts realized returns. Most runs converge above 0 .97 (cross-seed mean ≈ 0.95), with a minority settling near 0 .85, indicating that the critic accurately tracks the return-to-go targets that drive the policy gradient’s advantage estimates. The combination of stable losses and high R2 across seeds is consistent with convergence to a neighbor-hood of a stationary point of the joint objective; the dispersion across seeds narrows after roughly 20 ,000 steps. 

## 6.2 Cumulative Performance Illustration 

To present a clear visualization of cumulative gains and drawdown dynamics, Figure 4 shows the cumulative PnL curve of AlphaZeroBeta on one representative index—ˆGSPC (S&P 500)—over the full backtest period. 25 −1          

> 0
> 1
> 2
> Cumulative return
> −0.6
> −0.4
> −0.2
> 0
> Drawdown
> −0.5
> 0
> 0.5
> 1
> Long / short
> 2014 2015 2016 2018 2019 2020 2022 2023 2024
> 0
> 0.5
> 1
> Year
> Gross
> AlphaZeroBeta Index buy-and-hold
> MxSharpe baseline Decorr baseline

Fig. 4 Representative AlphaZeroBeta performance on the S&P 500 (ˆGSPC). Top: cumulative return for AlphaZeroBeta vs. index buy-and-hold, MxSharpe, and Decorr baselines. Below: draw-down, long/short exposure, and gross exposure trajectories. Returns are net of transaction costs and reflect daily rebalancing under walk-forward retraining. 

The strategy compounds steadily, avoids regime-specific collapses, and maintains stable return growth even through volatile periods, consistent with the per-market Sharpe ratios reported in Table 4. 

## 6.3 Full Market Performance Breakdown 

While Figure 4 provides a visual overview for a single market, the full set of cumulative PnL trajectories across all benchmark indices is included in Appendix A. These show that the agent generalizes across diverse geographies and index weighting schemes. 26 6.4 Risk Factor Exposures and Attribution 

To assess whether AlphaZeroBeta’s returns can be explained by standard risk premia, we run a factor attribution using a consistent panel of risk factors across markets. We start from the market, size, value, and profitability legs of the Fama–French five-factor model [23]. The investment factor (CMA) is excluded because it is nearly collinear with the proprietary quality-minus-junk spread used in our universes, which produced unstable estimates in preliminary tests; instead we retain that quality-minus-junk proxy (QUAL) to capture cross-sectional quality tilts. On top of these factors we add the Carhart momentum factor (MOM) [15], building on the momentum anomaly documented by Jegadeesh & Titman [36], and a short-term reversal factor (REV) following Jegadeesh [35]. This combination captures trend-following, mean-reversion, and quality dynamics without duplicating exposures. 

6.4.1 Model Specification 

For each market p with available factor data (six equity markets in our study: 000001.SS, ˆFTSE, ˆGDAXI, ˆGSPC, ˆHSI, and ˆNDX), we regress daily excess port-folio returns on this extended set. We exclude ˆDJI from this attribution because, with only 30 large-cap constituents, local SMB/HML/RMW/QUAL spread construction is economically thin and statistically unstable, so coefficient estimates are not reli-able. For 000001.SS, factor legs are computed on the same 2025-02-01 proxy universe described in Table 3; the resulting loadings therefore inherit the same survivorship caveat. rep,t = αp + βm,p rMKT ,t + βs,p SMB t + βv,p HML t

+ βq,p RMW t + βmom ,p MOM t + βrev ,p REV t

+ βqual ,p QUAL t + εp,t ,

(18) where the MKT/SMB/HML/RMW factor definitions follow Fama & French [22, 23], the momentum factor follows Carhart [15], and the short-term reversal follows Jegadeesh [35]. Newey–West heteroskedasticity- and autocorrelation-robust t-statistics accompany all coefficients. Factor series are aligned carefully to avoid inadvertent lead/lag contamination. U.S. factors (Ken French library data) are merged at New York close and used con-temporaneously for ˆGSPC and ˆNDX. For European indices (ˆFTSE, ˆGDAXI) and Asian indices (000001.SS, ˆHSI), where no equivalent public factor library is avail-able, we construct MKT/SMB/HML/RMW directly from local index constituents using the standard Fama–French sort breakpoints (MKT as the cap-weighted local index over the local risk-free rate; SMB and HML from 2 ×3 size/value sorts; RMW from operating-profitability sorts), reindex the resulting series to the local exchange calendar, and delay the returns by one trading day whenever the factor’s publica-tion timestamp occurs after the local market close. Momentum and reversal factors are constructed analogously from the same local universes and follow the same tim-ing rule. This alignment guarantees that exposure estimates reflect implementable lead/lag conventions rather than asynchronous time stamps. 27 6.4.2 Regression Results 

Table 5 reports the resulting coefficients for the six markets with usable factor feeds. To keep naming consistent with Table 4, we report Bloomberg index codes in the first column and retain the same market order (with ˆDJI omitted for the reason above). Market betas are statistically indistinguishable from zero across all regions, confirm-ing that AlphaZeroBeta maintains dollar-neutral exposures. Momentum loadings are positive and significant in every market, while reversal coefficients are negative, indi-cating that the policy favors sustained trends over short-term noise. Quality loadings are close to zero overall but mildly negative in the NASDAQ portfolio, consistent with temporary tilts toward high-growth, lower-profitability stocks. Intercepts remain positive and significant at conventional levels, reflecting benchmark-relative abnormal returns rather than universal CAPM alpha. Asterisks in Table 5 follow the standard convention (* p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01).   

> Table 5 Extended factor regression results with Newey–West t-statistics in parentheses. Specification corresponds to Eq. (18). QUAL denotes our profitability-based quality-minus-junk factor constructed from ROE, gross profitability, and leverage filters following Asness et al. [4]; the Fama–French CMA factor is omitted because of near collinearity with QUAL on the universes studied.

Market α MKT SMB HML RMW MOM REV QUAL 000001.SS 0.00047*** -0.002 0.032 0.009 0.005 0.114*** -0.029* -0.013 (3.15) (-0.14) (1.56) (0.48) (0.44) (3.55) (-1.76) (-0.99) ˆFTSE 0.00029** -0.004 -0.017 0.011 0.014 0.091*** -0.027* -0.009 (2.12) (-0.22) (-0.88) (0.55) (1.02) (3.74) (-1.76) (-0.77) ˆGDAXI 0.00033*** 0.006 -0.021 0.019 0.004 0.105*** -0.031** -0.022 (2.76) (0.42) (-1.02) (1.05) (0.41) (4.09) (-2.24) (-1.19) ˆGSPC 0.00042*** 0.011 0.028 -0.014 0.006 0.137*** -0.042** -0.011 (3.01) (0.62) (1.44) (-0.88) (0.55) (4.92) (-2.11) (-1.08) ˆHSI 0.00031** 0.009 0.013 0.018 0.011 0.128*** -0.036** -0.016 (2.09) (0.55) (0.72) (0.99) (0.88) (3.88) (-2.01) (-1.06) ˆNDX 0.00055*** 0.019 0.044* -0.022 -0.031* 0.162*** -0.038* -0.067** (3.44) (0.88) (1.79) (-1.31) (-1.96) (5.12) (-1.82) (-2.32)       

> *p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. Intercepts represent risk-model-relative abnormal returns rather than CAPM alpha. QUAL = quality-minus-junk spread.

6.4.3 Interpretation 

The factor attribution therefore supports a consistent economic picture: AlphaZe-roBeta behaves as a moderate trend follower with low beta exposure, meaningful avoidance of fast mean-reversion, and only minor quality tilts that depend on the index composition. The binary ablation in Table B1 confirms that removing the correlation 28 penalty ( λ1 = 0) raises market correlations into the 0 .4–0 .6 range and deepens draw-downs while also lowering Sharpe in every market, so the penalty acts as a beneficial regularizer rather than a pure cost to alpha at the operating point chosen here. 

6.4.4 Feature-Level Attribution 

To understand which inputs drive the learned policy, we apply two complementary attribution methods to the CNN-GRU encoder: grouped permutation importance and integrated gradients. Features are partitioned into four blocks: price/momentum sig-nals (returns, rolling means, technical indicators), volatility and regime indicators, macro/cross-asset drivers, and sentiment/flow inputs. For permutation importance, we shuffle each block in turn within the 2014–2024 out-of-sample window and measure the relative drop in mean Sharpe ratio (versus the unshuffled baseline), averaged across the 22 walk-forward folds and the seven mar-kets. The marginal drops are 37% (price/momentum), 18% (volatility/regime), 12% (macro/cross-asset), and 9% (sentiment/flows); the remaining 24% reflects interaction effects and redundancy across blocks. Integrated gradients, averaged over 256 random test-window evaluations per market, confirm that price/momentum and volatility sig-nals dominate the policy logits, while macro and sentiment features mainly modulate position sizing. These diagnostics are consistent with the factor loadings in Table 5: AlphaZero-Beta behaves as a trend-following policy modulated by volatility-aware sizing, with significant momentum loadings and only modest tilts on the remaining factors. 

# 7 Discussion 

Across the seven equity indices in Table 4 and the representative S&P 500 trajectory in Figure 4, AlphaZeroBeta delivers higher Sharpe ratios than the convex baselines, smaller absolute correlations with the benchmark, and drawdowns that are uniformly shallower than buy-and-hold and shallower than the decorrelation baseline in six of seven markets (Decorr produces a slightly shallower drawdown only on 000001.SS). The same hyperparameter setting transfers across markets without per-index tuning, indicating that the multi-objective reward—rather than the choice of RL algorithm alone—is the principal driver of performance in non-stationary equity environments. From a methodological standpoint, our findings build upon and extend earlier work on reinforcement learning in portfolio management [37, 44, 45, 67–69]. In contrast to approaches focused on return maximization, AlphaZeroBeta introduces a multi-objective reward function that explicitly penalizes market correlation and transaction costs. This encourages the discovery of uncorrelated alpha while promoting stable, cost-aware rebalancing. The cumulative PnL trajectory in Figure 4 shows that the AlphaZeroBeta draw-downs during the 2018Q4, 2020Q1, and 2022 episodes remain materially shallower than those of the index buy-and-hold path, consistent with the maximum drawdown column of Table 4. 29 7.1 Baseline Behavior 

Table 4 shows that the convex baselines trail AlphaZeroBeta in Sharpe ratio across all markets. Index B&H is passive and inherits all of the benchmark’s beta expo-sure; MxSharpe and Decorr, although recomputed at each rebalance, underperform for two interacting reasons. The first is estimation noise: sample means and covariances computed on short windows are unstable, so the optimizer overfits transient mean shifts and outputs concentrated portfolios that degrade once the in-sample covariance structure shifts—visible in the very low MxSharpe Sharpe on ˆGDAXI (0 .11) and the consistently negative Decorr Sharpes across all markets. The second is constraint asymmetry: all three baselines enforce full investment ( P 

> i

wi = 1) without penaliz-ing residual beta, so any mismatch between the training and test market factor leaves them net long, compounding drawdowns during stress regimes. AlphaZeroBeta continually re-estimates exposures through its state encoder and enforces dollar neutrality via the explicit centering-and-ℓ1-projection step in List-ing D.4.2; the correlation penalty in the reward then suppresses any residual beta arising from transaction costs or execution. This combination prevents persistent beta drift even when regimes switch, explaining why the agent maintains low correlations while delivering higher Sharpe ratios despite facing the same data. The unconstrained RL ablation in Table B1 further isolates the contribution of the neutrality penalty. Removing the correlation term ( λ1 = 0) lets the policy lean into prevailing index trends; correlations rise into the roughly 0.4–0.6 range and maximum drawdowns deepen by approximately 7–20 percentage points relative to AlphaZero-Beta, while out-of-sample Sharpe is lower in every market under this ablation. Because the turnover penalty remains active, the ablation cannot simply neutralize exposures through rapid hedging, so regime changes translate into beta shocks. These observa-tions confirm that AlphaZeroBeta’s superior performance does not stem solely from using DRL; it is the explicit reward shaping that enables simultaneous achievement of high Sharpe ratios and near-zero market correlation. More broadly, the results indicate that reinforcement learning is a tractable tool for portfolio construction when the reward encodes the constraints of interest directly. Casting allocation as a constrained stochastic control problem replaces the need for prespecified factor models or a fixed mean-variance objective with policy adaptation driven by reward shaping. 

## 7.2 Future Directions 

The findings point toward several potential directions for future research. 1. Extending the framework to multi-asset portfolios (fixed income, commodities, crypto) would allow evaluating inter-asset regime rotation and cross-asset neutral-ity. 2. Risk-conditioned policies that incorporate regime-specific volatility forecasts or macroeconomic indicators could improve responsiveness to systemic shocks. 3. Hierarchical reinforcement learning with a meta-controller would let higher-level agents allocate capital across multiple specialized AlphaZeroBeta sub-strategies. 30 4. Integrating real-time deployment constraints, including execution latency and slippage modeling, would narrow the gap between backtest and live deployment. 

# 8 Conclusions 

This paper presents AlphaZeroBeta, a deep reinforcement learning framework for dynamic, market-neutral portfolio construction. By formulating the asset allocation problem as a Markov decision process and optimizing a composite reward that balances risk-adjusted excess return, benchmark correlation, and transaction costs, we show that reinforcement learning can support risk-aware portfolio construction beyond pure return maximization. Empirical evidence from the 2014–2024 walk-forward study sup-ports the model’s ability to maintain neutrality while delivering benchmark-relative excess returns. Across seven global equity indices, AlphaZeroBeta achieves higher Sharpe ratios than the convex baselines and maintains near-zero benchmark correlations, with competitive drawdowns: its maximum drawdowns are uniformly shallower than the buy-and-hold path and shallower than the decorrelation baseline in six of seven markets, while the Sharpe-optimal baseline records shallower drawdowns in several markets. The model generalizes across markets with varying liquidity, structure, and volatility regimes without per-index tuning. Future work includes extending the framework to multi-asset portfolios (fixed income, commodities, crypto), incorporating execution-latency and slippage modeling for live deployment, and exploring hierarchical formulations in which a meta-controller allocates capital across several AlphaZeroBeta sub-strategies. Macroeconomic and regime-conditioned signals are a natural way to make the reward more risk-aware in periods of structural change. 

# Acknowledgements 

During the preparation of this manuscript, the author used ChatGPT (OpenAI) and Claude Code (Anthropic) to assist with editing and LaTeX formatting. The author has reviewed and edited all generated content and takes full responsibility for the final version of this publication. 31 Appendix A Cumulative Performance 

This appendix reports cumulative equity curves for each benchmark so the distribu-tional statistics in Section 6 can be inspected visually. Each page covers one index and pairs a short interpretive note with the corresponding figure. 32 The SSE Composite buy-and-hold experienced multiple severe stress episodes over 2014–2024 (the 2015–2016 domestic equity crash and policy-driven declines in 2018 and 2022). AlphaZeroBeta compounds steadily through these regimes, delivering Sharpe 1.63 ± 0.38, maximum drawdown −0.34 ± 0.11, and near-zero correlation −0.02 ± 0.05 to the index (Table 4).           

> 0
> 1
> 2
> Cumulative return
> −1
> −0.5
> 0
> Drawdown
> −0.5
> 0
> 0.5
> 1
> Long / short
> 2014 2015 2016 2018 2019 2020 2022 2023 2024
> 0
> 0.5
> 1
> Year
> Gross
> AlphaZeroBeta Index buy-and-hold
> MxSharpe baseline Decorr baseline

Fig. A1 Cumulative PnL and exposure trajectories for the SSE Composite (China, 000001.SS). Top: cumulative return; below: drawdown, long/short exposure, gross exposure. 

33 The DAX is a 40-stock benchmark of large German industrials and exporters, with the 2018 trade tensions, 2020 COVID drawdown, and 2022 energy crisis all visible in the index curve. AlphaZeroBeta recovers quickly from each shock and achieves the shallowest maximum drawdown across the seven markets ( −0.16 ± 0.11, the best DD in Table 4), with Sharpe 0 .86 ± 0.23 and correlation 0 .05 ± 0.04.           

> −0.5
> 0
> 0.5
> 1
> 1.5
> Cumulative return
> −0.6
> −0.4
> −0.2
> 0
> Drawdown
> −0.5
> 0
> 0.5
> 1
> Long / short
> 2014 2015 2016 2018 2019 2020 2022 2023 2024
> 0
> 0.5
> 1
> Year
> Gross
> AlphaZeroBeta Index buy-and-hold
> MxSharpe baseline Decorr baseline

Fig. A2 Cumulative PnL and exposure trajectories for the DAX (Germany, ˆGDAXI). Top: cumu-lative return; below: drawdown, long/short exposure, gross exposure. 

34 The Hang Seng buy-and-hold curve reflects the prolonged 2021–2023 sell-off driven by China property stress, tech-sector regulation, and capital-flow reversals. AlphaZero-Beta tolerates these abrupt volatility spikes, delivering Sharpe 1 .04 ± 0.33, maximum drawdown −0.21 ± 0.22, and near-zero correlation 0 .01 ± 0.04 (Table 4).           

> 0
> 0.5
> 1
> 1.5
> Cumulative return
> −0.6
> −0.4
> −0.2
> 0
> Drawdown
> −0.5
> 0
> 0.5
> 1
> Long / short
> 2014 2015 2016 2018 2019 2020 2022 2023 2024
> 0
> 0.5
> 1
> Year
> Gross
> AlphaZeroBeta Index buy-and-hold
> MxSharpe baseline Decorr baseline

Fig. A3 Cumulative PnL and exposure trajectories for the Hang Seng Index (Hong Kong SAR, China, ˆHSI). Top: cumulative return; below: drawdown, long/short exposure, gross exposure. 

35 The NASDAQ-100 had the deepest index buy-and-hold drawdown of the seven markets, driven by the 2022 rate-hiking sell-off in long-duration tech equities. Alp-haZeroBeta participates in momentum phases and trims exposure when cross-sectional dispersion narrows, producing Sharpe 1 .48 ± 0.41, maximum drawdown −0.32 ± 0.10, and correlation 0 .07 ± 0.06 (Table 4).           

> 0
> 2
> 4
> Cumulative return
> −1.5
> −1
> −0.5
> 0
> Drawdown
> −0.5
> 0
> 0.5
> 1
> Long / short
> 2014 2015 2016 2018 2019 2020 2022 2023 2024
> 0
> 0.5
> 1
> Year
> Gross
> AlphaZeroBeta Index buy-and-hold
> MxSharpe baseline Decorr baseline

Fig. A4 Cumulative PnL and exposure trajectories for the NASDAQ-100 (U.S., ˆNDX). Top: cumu-lative return; below: drawdown, long/short exposure, gross exposure. 

36 The FTSE 100 traded sideways for much of 2014–2024, with notable shocks at the 2016 Brexit referendum, the 2020 COVID sell-off, and the 2022 mini-budget crisis. AlphaZeroBeta grows gradually in this slow regime via relative-value rotation between resource-heavy and defensive sectors: Sharpe 0 .94 ±0.19, maximum drawdown −0.28 ±

0.09, correlation −0.02 ± 0.08 (Table 4).           

> 0
> 0.5
> 1
> Cumulative return
> −0.6
> −0.4
> −0.2
> 0
> Drawdown
> −0.5
> 0
> 0.5
> 1
> Long / short
> 2014 2015 2016 2018 2019 2020 2022 2023 2024
> 0
> 0.5
> 1
> Year
> Gross
> AlphaZeroBeta Index buy-and-hold
> MxSharpe baseline Decorr baseline

Fig. A5 Cumulative PnL and exposure trajectories for the FTSE 100 (U.K., ˆFTSE). Top: cumu-lative return; below: drawdown, long/short exposure, gross exposure. 

37 The Dow Jones Industrial Average is a 30-stock, price-weighted index of U.S. blue-chip companies—the smallest universe in the panel. AlphaZeroBeta produces a smooth ascent despite the limited stock-selection breadth: Sharpe 1 .20 ±0.28, maximum draw-down −0.27 ± 0.14, correlation 0 .03 ± 0.07 (Table 4); ˆDJI is excluded from the factor attribution (Section 6.4) because local SMB/HML/RMW construction is statistically thin at N =30.           

> 0
> 0.5
> 1
> 1.5
> Cumulative return
> −0.6
> −0.4
> −0.2
> 0
> Drawdown
> −0.5
> 0
> 0.5
> 1
> Long / short
> 2014 2015 2016 2018 2019 2020 2022 2023 2024
> 0
> 0.5
> 1
> Year
> Gross
> AlphaZeroBeta Index buy-and-hold
> MxSharpe baseline Decorr baseline

Fig. A6 Cumulative PnL and exposure trajectories for the Dow Jones Industrial Average (U.S., ˆDJI). Top: cumulative return; below: drawdown, long/short exposure, gross exposure. 

38 Table B1 AlphaZeroBeta vs. unconstrained (return-maximizing) RL baseline. Values are mean ±

> standard deviation across the 22 walk-forward folds and nine independent RL initializations per fold, matching the protocol of Table 4; the RL baseline uses the same protocol.

Index Method Sharpe ratio Max drawdown Correlation 

000001.SS AlphaZeroBeta 1.63 ± 0.38 −0.34 ± 0.11 −0.02 ± 0.05 RL (return-max) 0.95 ± 0.27 −0.52 ± 0.18 0.42 ± 0.16 ˆFTSE AlphaZeroBeta 0.94 ± 0.19 −0.28 ± 0.09 −0.02 ± 0.08 RL (return-max) 0.65 ± 0.21 −0.35 ± 0.12 0.51 ± 0.19 ˆGDAXI AlphaZeroBeta 0.86 ± 0.23 −0.16 ± 0.11 0.05 ± 0.04 RL (return-max) 0.75 ± 0.24 −0.33 ± 0.14 0.48 ± 0.17 ˆGSPC AlphaZeroBeta 1.61 ± 0.48 −0.26 ± 0.15 0.15 ± 0.09 RL (return-max) 1.12 ± 0.31 −0.38 ± 0.13 0.57 ± 0.15 ˆHSI AlphaZeroBeta 1.04 ± 0.33 −0.21 ± 0.22 0.01 ± 0.04 RL (return-max) 0.58 ± 0.25 −0.41 ± 0.16 0.49 ± 0.18 ˆNDX AlphaZeroBeta 1.48 ± 0.41 −0.32 ± 0.10 0.07 ± 0.06 RL (return-max) 1.10 ± 0.28 −0.41 ± 0.15 0.61 ± 0.14 ˆDJI AlphaZeroBeta 1.20 ± 0.28 −0.27 ± 0.14 0.03 ± 0.07 RL (return-max) 0.88 ± 0.26 −0.36 ± 0.12 0.52 ± 0.12 

# Appendix B Ablation Study: Return-Maximizing RL Baseline 

To quantify the incremental benefit of an explicit neutrality penalty, we train an ablation agent that shares AlphaZeroBeta’s architecture, training windows, and transaction-cost penalty but sets λ1 = 0, so the reward reduces to risk-adjusted excess return minus the turnover penalty (with no correlation term). Table B1 contrasts this unconstrained RL baseline with the full AlphaZeroBeta policy across the evaluation indices. AlphaZeroBeta rows replicate the summary statistics from Table 4 to facilitate like-for-like inspection. The ablation confirms that, even when unconstrained RL surpasses passive bench-marks in Sharpe ratio, the absence of the correlation penalty leads to substantially larger beta exposures and weaker drawdown control. Relative to the full AlphaZer-oBeta agent, the return-maximizing baseline therefore sacrifices neutrality and risk control, reinforcing the need for the composite reward. 

# Appendix C Feature Catalog 

This appendix documents the full feature set used by AlphaZeroBeta. Section C.1 provides the qualitative taxonomy of Bloomberg-derived signals and their role in the model; Section C.2 reports the approximate number of engineered signals per asset within each group together with sampling frequencies. 39 Table C2 Categorization of Bloomberg-derived features used in AlphaZeroBeta’s state representation. 

Category Example Field /Ticker Model Role 

Price PX LAST (close price) Core input for returns and volatility. Volume PX VOLUME Captures liquidity and trading activity. Rolling Stats rolling mean/std of 

PX LAST (derived) Describes short-term distribution shifts for volatility and regime modeling. Technical EMAVG (EMA), MACD , RSI Encodes momentum and trend direction. Corporate Actions 

EQY DVD YLD Reflects dividends, buybacks, and splits. Fundamentals RETURN ON EQUITY Measures profitability and efficiency. Earnings EPS surprise vs. estimate Captures valuation shocks and revisions. Insiders NUM INSIDER SHARES SOLD Signals internal sentiment and behavior. Sentiment NEWS SENTIMENT DAILY MIN Polarity score from news headlines. Governance ISS QUALITYSCORE ESG proxy for governance and transparency. Macro NAPMPMI INDEX (PMI) Business cycle and macro regime signal. Rates FEDL01 INDEX (Effective Fed Funds) Encodes monetary policy direction. Volatility VIX INDEX Gauges uncertainty and hedging demand. Options Flow 12MO CALL IMP VOL Reflects speculative skew and pressure. Cross-Asset BCOM INDEX (Commodi-ties) Captures macro trends and inflation. Term Structure USYC2Y10 INDEX (2s10s) Signals recession risk and yield curve slope. Sectors XLK US EQUITY (Tech ETF) Used for factor and industry grouping. Metadata GICS sector / index tags Supports stratification and normalization. 

## C.1 Taxonomy 

This subsection categorizes Bloomberg-derived features used in AlphaZeroBeta’s state representation (Table C2). The three broad blocks—price/liquidity, fundamental-s/macro, and sentiment/flow—ensure the agent observes both fast-moving market signals and slower structural drivers; these groupings complement the counts reported in Section C.2. Together these categories span the three broad blocks introduced above (price/liquid-ity, fundamentals/macro, and sentiment/flow) and provide both fast and slow drivers of market neutrality. 

## C.2 Per-Asset Counts 

Table C3 supplements the taxonomy by listing each feature group together with sam-pling frequency and the approximate number of distinct signals per asset used in our experiments. Price and liquidity features refresh daily, fundamentals and governance arrive quarterly, and macro/sentiment indicators bridge the two horizons, allowing the RL agent to balance tactical and structural inputs. 40 Table C3 Feature groups, sampling frequency, and approximate signal counts (per asset unless noted). 

Feature cat-egory Examples Frequency Approx. count 

Price-based Close, open, high, low prices; log returns; rolling means and standard deviations (5/20/60-day) Daily ∼12 Volume/liquidity Volume, turnover, bid-ask spread, rolling average volume Daily ∼6Technical indi-cators EMA, MACD, RSI, Bollinger bands, momentum Daily/weekly ∼18 Corporate actions Dividend yield, split factors, shares outstanding Daily/monthly ∼4Fundamentals EPS, ROE, book-to-market, debt-to-equity ratios Quarterly ∼24 Earnings sur-prises Actual vs. expected earnings; post-earnings drift signals Quarterly ∼8Insider trading Net insider purchases/sales; insider sentiment indices Daily/weekly ∼4Sentiment News polarity, social sentiment, CDS-implied risk Daily ∼6Governance ESG/gov. scores, quality ratings Quarterly ∼5Macroeconomic Inflation, unemployment, GDP, policy rates Monthly/qtrly ∼12 Rates & curves 3M/10Y yields, yield-curve slope, term premia Daily ∼6Volatility &options VIX, implied vol surfaces, skew Daily ∼7Cross-asset indices Commodity, currency, credit indices Daily ∼8Sector ETF-s/indices Sector ETF returns (e.g. XLK, XLF), rotation signals Daily ∼12 Metadata Market cap, GICS sector, region tags Static ∼6

Approximate counts refer to the number of engineered signals per asset (or per index for macro-level inputs) within each group; actual values vary slightly across universes because of data availability. This breakdown illustrates that the RL agent ingests signals ranging from daily price action to quarterly fundamentals, enabling a nuanced response to varied market regimes. All features are normalized to zero mean and unit variance within each training batch. Missing values are forward-filled or, where appropriate, replaced by industry-median values. Lagged versions of selected variables are included to allow the agent to recognize temporal patterns. All features used in our experiments are subject to the licensing constraints discussed in Appendix D. 41 Appendix D Reproducibility and Code Availability 

Our implementation comprises: (i) a data-acquisition layer interfacing with Bloomberg Terminal and other licensed providers; (ii) pre-processing routines that clean, win-sorize, and engineer features; (iii) the RL environment and agent implementations; and (iv) evaluation scripts. Portions of (i) and specific vendor integrations in (ii) depend on proprietary APIs (e.g. Bloomberg Python/Java SDK and vendor-specific modules for options flow and sentiment) that cannot be redistributed. To support replication, we provide high-level descriptions and pseudocode for components independent of proprietary software. Section D.1 presents the core pseudocode (data pre-processing, environment, agent training, and reward); Section D.2 reports the cost schedule and key hyperparameters used in all experiments; Section D.3 documents implementation notes, evaluation guidance, and data licensing; Section D.4 provides additional code examples for the data-loading, environment, policy network, and recurrent PPO agent. 

## D.1 Pseudocode 

D.1.1 Data pre-processing pseudocode 

Listing D.1.1. Daily pre-processing loop for indices. 

W = 20 # rolling window (business days) for index in indices: prices = load_price_data(index).sort_index() log_ret = np.log(prices["close"]).diff() # Winsorize at the [1%, 99%] PIT quantiles fitted on the 2004-2010 # warm-up segment; thresholds are frozen before evaluation opens. warm_up = log_ret.loc[log_ret.index < TRAINING_START].dropna() lo, hi = warm_up.quantile([0.01, 0.99]).to_numpy() log_ret = log_ret.clip(lower=lo, upper=hi) features = pd.DataFrame({ "log_ret": log_ret, "ret_mean_20": log_ret.rolling(W).mean(), "ret_std_20": log_ret.rolling(W).std(ddof=0), "volume_mean_20": prices["volume"].rolling(W).mean(), }) features = add_technical_indicators(features, prices) # EMA, RSI, MACD # Align auxiliary panels onto the price index in a single concat, # then forward-fill (never bfill, which would leak the future). df = (pd.concat([features, fundamental_df, macro_df], axis=1, join="outer") .reindex(prices.index).ffill()) save_processed_data(index, df) 

42 The schematic single-stock feature construction in Listing D.1.2 is paired with the full production version in Listing D.4.1. 

Listing D.1.2. Single-stock feature construction (schematic). 

def compute_features_for_stock(prices, aux, windows=(5, 20, 60)): log_ret = np.log(prices["close"]).diff() base = pd.DataFrame({"log_ret": log_ret, "vol": prices["volume"]}, index=prices.index) # Rolling mean/std on returns and volume for each window in ‘windows‘. rolls = pd.concat( [base[col].rolling(w).agg(["mean", "std"]) .add_prefix(f"{col}_").add_suffix(f"_{w}") for col in ("log_ret", "vol") for w in windows], axis=1, )# Technical indicators (EMA-12/26, MACD, RSI-14, Bollinger-20). close = prices["close"] tech = pd.concat([ ta.trend.EMAIndicator(close, 12).ema_indicator().rename("ema_12"), ta.trend.EMAIndicator(close, 26).ema_indicator().rename("ema_26"), ta.trend.MACD(close).macd_diff().rename("macd_diff"), ta.momentum.RSIIndicator(close, 14).rsi().rename("rsi_14"), ], axis=1) # One concat aligns every auxiliary panel onto the price grid; # ffill (never bfill) carries past values forward without leaking. auxiliary = pd.concat([df.reindex(prices.index) for df in aux.values()], axis=1, keys=aux.keys()) return (pd.concat([prices, base, rolls, tech, auxiliary], axis=1) .ffill() .dropna(how="any")) 

D.1.2 Reinforcement-learning environment pseudocode 

Listing D.1.3 sketches a single-asset toy environment used to illustrate the decision-at-

t/execution-at-t+1 timing convention; the full cross-sectional production environment is shown in Listing D.4.2. 

Listing D.1.3. Minimal trading environment (schematic). 

class TradingEnv(gym.Env): # Decision-at-t / execution-at-t+1: action chosen at close(t) earns # return(t+1). def __init__(self, prices, features, cost_lookup, capital=1.0): 

43 self.prices, self.features = prices, features self.cost_lookup = cost_lookup # date -> bps per side self.capital = float(capital) self.reset() def reset(self): self.t, self.position = 0, 0 # position in {-1, 0, +1} self.cash = self.nav = self.prev_nav = self.capital return self._get_state() def _get_state(self): return np.concatenate([self.features[self.t], [self.position, self.cash / self.capital]]) def step(self, action): p_t, p_next = (float(self.prices["close"].iat[i]) for i in (self.t, self.t + 1)) dpos = action - self.position tc = self.cost_lookup(self.prices.index[self.t]) * 1e-4 * abs(dpos) * p_t self.cash -= tc + dpos * p_t self.position = action self.nav = self.cash + self.position * p_next # log(nav / prev_nav) is the stable form; floor avoids /0 on flat days. reward = float(np.log(max(self.nav, 1e-12) / max(self.prev_nav, 1e-12))) self.prev_nav, self.t = self.nav, self.t + 1 done = self.t >= len(self.prices) - 1 return self._get_state(), reward, done, {} 

D.1.3 Agent training loop pseudocode 

Listing D.1.4. Actor-critic training loop (schematic). 

agent = ActorCriticNetwork(state_dim, action_dim) optimizer = torch.optim.Adam(agent.parameters(), lr=3e-4) for epoch in range(num_epochs): state, done = env.reset(), False while not done: action, log_prob, value = agent.act(state) next_state, reward, done, _ = env.step(action) with torch.no_grad(): next_value = agent.value(next_state) * (1.0 - float(done)) td_target = reward + 0.99 * next_value # gamma = 0.99 

44 Table D4 Deterministic execution-cost and borrow-fee schedule used in all reported backtests. Trading costs are charged per side on each rebalance; borrow fees are annualized and accrued linearly over holding days. 

Market bucket Top-decile cost Other names Borrow fee Applies to 

U.S. large-cap 5 bps/side 15 bps/side 30 bps/year ˆGSPC, ˆNDX, ˆDJI U.K./Germany 10 bps/side 15 bps/side 45 bps/year ˆFTSE, ˆGDAXI Hong Kong SAR, China 10 bps/side 20 bps/side 75 bps/year ˆHSI China (proxy universe) 30 bps/side 30 bps/side 120 bps/year 000001.SS 

advantage = td_target - value loss = (-log_prob * advantage.detach() + 0.5 * F.mse_loss(value, td_target)) # value-loss coef 0.5 optimizer.zero_grad(set_to_none=True) loss.backward() optimizer.step() state = next_state 

D.1.4 Reward computation 

Listing D.1.5 implements the composite reward of Section 3.7 as a pure function of the portfolio and benchmark returns at step t, the rolling portfolio volatility and benchmark correlation, and the pre- and post-trade weight vectors. The three terms— risk-adjusted excess return, correlation penalty, and turnover penalty—correspond to Eq. (8). Default coefficients ( λ1 = 0 .5, λ2 = 0 .001) match Table D5; σp is floored at 10 −8 to guard the risk-adjusted term against degenerate flat-volatility windows. 

Listing D.1.5. AlphaZeroBeta reward used inside the environment. 

# Inputs: realised returns rp_t (portfolio), rm_t (benchmark), # rolling volatility sigma_p_t, rolling Corr(r_p, r_m) corr_pm_t, # pre- and post-trade weight vectors w_prev, w; coefficients lambda1, lambda2. def alpha_zero_beta_reward(rp_t, rm_t, sigma_p_t, corr_pm_t, w, w_prev, lambda1=0.5, lambda2=0.001): risk_adjusted = (rp_t - rm_t) / max(sigma_p_t, 1e-8) # 1e-8 floor on sigma turnover = float(np.abs(w - w_prev).sum()) # L1 weight change return float(risk_adjusted - lambda1 * corr_pm_t - lambda2 * turnover) 

## D.2 Configuration and Tables 

D.2.1 Execution-cost and borrow-fee schedule 

Table D4 reports the exact transaction-cost and borrow-fee constants used in all back-tests. Top-decile membership is determined by trailing 60-trading-day average dollar volume within each index universe and refreshed monthly, using only information available up to each rebalance date. 45 Table D5 Key reinforcement learning hyperparameters used in AlphaZeroBeta. Values refer to the main experiments; any deviations in robustness checks are stated in the text. 

Component Value / description 

RL algorithm Proximal Policy Optimization (Recurrent PPO) Policy/value network CNN-GRU encoder; each head has a 512-unit hidden ReLU layer. Value head outputs a scalar Vϕ(st); pol-icy head outputs an N -dimensional weight vector with Tanh activation, where N is the universe size (30 for ˆDJI to ∼2,200 for 000001.SS) Discount factor γ 0.99 (daily data; close to unity) Learning rate 3 × 10 −4 (Adam optimizer) PPO clip ratio 0.20 GAE parameter λGAE 0.95 Entropy coefficient 0.01 Value loss coefficient 0.5Minibatch size 256 trajectories per update (across environments) Training window length 36 months (3 years) of daily data, immediately pre-ceding the 6-month validation segment of each fold Agent observation window (nagent window )100 daily timesteps per channel of the stacked dai-ly/weekly/monthly CNN input (see Figure 2) Rolling window for σp and Corr( rp, r m)60 business days ( ≈3 months) Number of PPO epochs per update 10 Correlation penalty λ1 0.5 (market-neutrality strength) Turnover penalty λ2 0.001 (transaction-cost intensity) Number of walk-forward splits 

K

22 non-overlapping 6-month test splits (Jan 2014– Dec 2024) 

D.2.2 Key hyperparameters 

Table D5 summarizes the main reinforcement learning hyperparameters used in our experiments. Where possible, we follow standard settings from widely used PPO imple-mentations and keep these values fixed across markets; λ1 and λ2 are chosen through manual optimization on pilot experiments to balance market neutrality and turnover against Sharpe ratio, as discussed in Subsection 3.7. These values represent heuris-tic choices that work well across the indices tested; systematic sensitivity analysis and market-specific tuning may further improve performance and represent important directions for future research. 46 D.3 Implementation Notes and Reproducibility 

D.3.1 Implementation notes 

1. Volatility σp(t) and correlation Corr( rp(t), r m(t)) are estimated over a sliding window (e.g. several months of daily data). Exponential weighting can improve responsiveness. 2. Coefficients λ1 and λ2 control market neutrality and turnover penalties; optimal values depend on the asset universe and frequency. 3. For reporting standard Sharpe ratios alongside the reward, subtract the risk-free rate from portfolio returns. The reward’s ∆ r(t) = rp(t) − rm(t) is invariant to this subtraction (the risk-free rate cancels when both legs are excess-of-RF). 

D.3.2 Evaluation and replication 

To reproduce the paper’s results, researchers require a high-quality historical dataset containing prices, volumes, corporate actions, and macro variables for the indices described in the main paper. With such data, the pre-processing pipeline and RL pseudocode above can be implemented in Python using open-source libraries such as pandas , numpy , torch , gymnasium , the ta technical-analysis package (matching the listings in this appendix), and stable-baselines3 . In practice, one can rely on the recurrent extensions in sb3-contrib (RecurrentPPO) for a production-ready implementation of the policy gradient updates. We suggest evaluating performance with rolling walk-forward splits that keep each test window out of the correspond-ing training window. Key metrics include cumulative return, Sharpe ratio, maximum drawdown, and turnover. 

D.3.3 Data and licensing 

The complete code base cannot be made publicly available, as certain components depend on licensed Bloomberg functionality and proprietary third-party libraries that are not eligible for redistribution. Listings D.1.1–D.1.5 capture the essential computations and can serve as a blueprint for independent replication. 

## D.4 Additional Code Examples 

Listing D.4.1. Encapsulating data loading and feature engineering. 

from dataclasses import dataclass from functools import reduce from pathlib import Path import numpy as np, pandas as pd, ta from sklearn.preprocessing import OneHotEncoder DATA_DIR = Path("./data") RET_WINDOWS = (5, 20, 60) AUX_BLOCKS = ("fundamentals", "earnings", "insiders", "sentiment", "governance") 

47 @dataclass(frozen=True) class Dataset: daily: np.ndarray # (T, N, F_d) | per-ticker daily features weekly: np.ndarray # (T_w, N, F_d) monthly: np.ndarray # (T_m, N, F_d) returns: np.ndarray # (T, N) per-ticker log returns benchmark: np.ndarray # (T,) benchmark log returns dates: pd.DatetimeIndex def _read_panel(path): return pd.read_csv(path, parse_dates=["date"]).set_index("date") def _technical_block(close): # EMA-12/26, MACD, RSI-14, Bollinger-20 macd = ta.trend.MACD(close) boll = ta.volatility.BollingerBands(close, 20, 2.0) return pd.concat([ ta.trend.EMAIndicator(close, 12).ema_indicator().rename("ema_12"), ta.trend.EMAIndicator(close, 26).ema_indicator().rename("ema_26"), macd.macd().rename("macd"), macd.macd_signal().rename("macd_signal"), macd.macd_diff().rename("macd_diff"), ta.momentum.RSIIndicator(close, 14).rsi().rename("rsi_14"), boll.bollinger_lband().rename("bb_low"), boll.bollinger_hband().rename("bb_high"), ], axis=1) class DataModule: """Builds aligned daily/weekly/monthly tensors for the RL agent. Panels are reindexed onto the common daily grid and ffill’d (never bfill).""" def __init__(self, stock_list, benchmark_ticker): self.stock_list, self.benchmark_ticker = stock_list, benchmark_ticker meta = pd.read_csv(DATA_DIR / "stock_metadata.csv") ohe = OneHotEncoder(sparse_output=False).fit(meta[["sector"]]) self.sector_ohe = pd.DataFrame( ohe.transform(meta[["sector"]]), index=meta["ticker"].values, columns=ohe.get_feature_names_out(["sector"]), )def _compute_single_stock_features(self, ticker): prices = _read_panel(DATA_DIR / f"{ticker}.csv") log_ret = np.log(prices["close"]).diff() vol = prices["volume"] rolls = pd.concat([pd.DataFrame({ f"ret_mean_{w}": log_ret.rolling(w).mean(), 

> 48

f"ret_std_{w}": log_ret.rolling(w).std(ddof=0), f"vol_mean_{w}": vol.rolling(w).mean(), f"vol_std_{w}": vol.rolling(w).std(ddof=0), }) for w in RET_WINDOWS], axis=1) aux = [_read_panel(DATA_DIR / f"{ticker}_{name}.csv") for name in AUX_BLOCKS] # One concat aligns everything on the price index; ffill (never bfill). return pd.concat([prices.assign(log_ret=log_ret), rolls, _technical_block(prices["close"]), *aux], axis=1).ffill() def build_dataset(self): # 1) Per-ticker daily features with broadcast sector one-hot. raw = {} for ticker in self.stock_list: f = self._compute_single_stock_features(ticker) sector = self.sector_ohe.loc[ticker] f[sector.index] = sector.values # broadcast row raw[ticker] = f.dropna(how="any") # 2) Common date grid via Index reduction (O(N), preserves DatetimeIndex). common = reduce(pd.Index.intersection, (df.index for df in raw.values())).sort_values() feature_cols = raw[self.stock_list[0]].columns.drop("log_ret") stack = lambda key: np.stack( [raw[t].loc[common, key].to_numpy() for t in self.stock_list], axis=1) daily, returns = stack(feature_cols), stack("log_ret") # 3) Weekly/monthly aggregations (last value in each bucket). def _resample(rule): panels = {t: df.resample(rule).last() for t, df in raw.items()} grid = reduce(pd.Index.intersection, (p.index for p in panels.values())).sort_values() return np.stack([panels[t].loc[grid, feature_cols].to_numpy() for t in self.stock_list], axis=1) weekly, monthly = _resample("W-FRI"), _resample("ME") # PIT-safe rules # 4) Benchmark on the common daily grid. bench = _read_panel(DATA_DIR / f"{self.benchmark_ticker}.csv") bench_ret = np.log(bench["close"]).diff().reindex(common).to_numpy() return Dataset(daily, weekly, monthly, returns, bench_ret, common) 

Listing D.4.2. Market-neutral environment with custom reward. 

import gym import numpy as np 

> 49

# Cross-sectional market-neutral environment. State: stacked daily/weekly/ # monthly feature tensors + previous weights. Action: target weights in # [-1, 1]^N, projected to dollar-neutral with L1-budget <= 1. # Reward: composite (risk-adjusted excess return - lambda_corr * corr # - lambda_cost * turnover); see Section 3 reward function for full form. class AlphaZeroBetaEnv(gym.Env): def __init__(self, daily, weekly, monthly, returns, benchmark, lambda_corr=0.5, lambda_cost=0.001, vol_window=60): super().__init__() self.daily, self.weekly, self.monthly = daily, weekly, monthly self.returns, self.benchmark = returns, benchmark self.T, self.N, self.F_d = daily.shape self.lambda_corr, self.lambda_cost, self.vol_window = ( lambda_corr, lambda_cost, vol_window) self.action_space = gym.spaces.Box(-1, 1, shape=(self.N,), dtype=np.float32) obs_dim = self.N * (self.F_d + weekly.shape[2] + monthly.shape[2]) + self.N self.observation_space = gym.spaces.Box(-np.inf, np.inf, shape=(obs_dim,), dtype=np.float32) def reset(self): self.t, self.prev_weights = 0, np.zeros(self.N, dtype=np.float32) return self._get_obs() def _get_obs(self): # Use the most recent CLOSED weekly/monthly bucket: (t//k)-1 skips # the in-progress bucket whose end-of-period values are unobservable. idx = lambda k, n: int(np.clip(self.t // k - 1, 0, n - 1)) return np.concatenate([ self.daily[self.t].ravel(), self.weekly[idx(5, self.weekly.shape[0])].ravel(), self.monthly[idx(21, self.monthly.shape[0])].ravel(), self.prev_weights, ]) def step(self, action): weights = action - action.mean() # dollar-neutral gross = np.abs(weights).sum() if gross > 1.0: weights = weights / gross # ||w||_1 <= 1 weights = weights.astype(np.float32) # Decision-at-t, execution-at-t+1. rp_t = float(weights @ self.returns[self.t + 1]) rm_t = float(self.benchmark[self.t + 1]) 

> 50

# Rolling sigma_p and Corr over weights HELD on [t-W, t), so r_p(s) # is realised (not in-sample). Empty on the very first step. if self.t == 0: sigma_p, corr = 1e-8, 0.0 else: s = max(0, self.t - self.vol_window) rp_hist = self.returns[s:self.t] @ self.prev_weights rm_hist = self.benchmark[s:self.t] sigma_p = max(float(rp_hist.std(ddof=0)), 1e-8) corr = (float(np.corrcoef(rp_hist, rm_hist)[0, 1]) if rp_hist.size > 1 else 0.0) turnover = float(np.abs(weights - self.prev_weights).sum()) reward = ((rp_t - rm_t) / sigma_p - self.lambda_corr * corr - self.lambda_cost * turnover) self.prev_weights, self.t = weights, self.t + 1 done = self.t >= self.T - 2 # need returns[t+1] to be valid obs = self._get_obs() if not done else None return obs, reward, done, {} 

Listing D.4.3. Multi-scale policy network (CNN-GRU with heads). 

import torch import torch.nn as nn # 1-D CNN over (daily, weekly, monthly) channels followed by a GRU. # Stacking the three resolutions on the channel axis lets one conv stack # mix horizons before the recurrent layer (kernels 8/4/3, strides 4/2/1, # filters 32/64/64). class MultiScaleEncoder(nn.Module): def __init__(self, feature_dim, hidden_size=512, agent_window=100): super().__init__() in_ch = 3 * feature_dim layers, prev = [], in_ch for out_ch, k, s in zip((32, 64, 64), (8, 4, 3), (4, 2, 1)): layers += [nn.Conv1d(prev, out_ch, kernel_size=k, stride=s), nn.ReLU(inplace=True)] prev = out_ch self.conv = nn.Sequential(*layers, nn.Flatten()) with torch.no_grad(): self.flat_dim = self.conv(torch.zeros(1, in_ch, agent_window)).numel() self.gru = nn.GRU(self.flat_dim, hidden_size, batch_first=True) def forward(self, daily, weekly, monthly, hidden): feat = self.conv(torch.cat([daily, weekly, monthly], dim=1)).unsqueeze(1) 

> 51

out, new_hidden = self.gru(feat, hidden) return out.squeeze(1), new_hidden class PolicyValueNet(nn.Module): """Shared encoder + Tanh-bounded policy head (N assets) + scalar value head.""" def __init__(self, feature_dim, num_assets, hidden_size=512, head_hidden=512): super().__init__() self.encoder = MultiScaleEncoder(feature_dim, hidden_size) self.policy_head = nn.Sequential( nn.Linear(hidden_size, head_hidden), nn.ReLU(inplace=True), nn.Linear(head_hidden, num_assets), nn.Tanh()) self.value_head = nn.Sequential( nn.Linear(hidden_size, head_hidden), nn.ReLU(inplace=True), nn.Linear(head_hidden, 1)) def forward(self, daily, weekly, monthly, hidden): embedding, new_hidden = self.encoder(daily, weekly, monthly, hidden) return (self.policy_head(embedding), self.value_head(embedding).squeeze(-1), new_hidden) 

Listing D.4.4. Agent and training with recurrent PPO (skeleton). 

import logging from dataclasses import dataclass import numpy as np, torch import torch.nn.functional as F from torch.optim import Adam GAMMA, GAE_LAMBDA, PPO_CLIP, PPO_EPOCHS = 0.99, 0.95, 0.20, 10 log = logging.getLogger("alphazerobeta") @dataclass class Rollout: obs_seq: list # list of (daily, weekly, monthly) tensor triples actions: torch.Tensor # untransformed samples rewards: torch.Tensor values: torch.Tensor log_probs: torch.Tensor class AlphaZeroBetaAgent: """Recurrent PPO agent for the AlphaZeroBetaEnv.""" def __init__(self, env, feature_dim, hidden_size=512, lr=3e-4): 

> 52

self.env = env self.model = PolicyValueNet(feature_dim, env.N, hidden_size) self.optimizer = Adam(self.model.parameters(), lr=lr) self.hidden_size = hidden_size def _slice(self, t): env = self.env idx = lambda k, n: int(np.clip(t // k - 1, 0, n - 1)) as_t = lambda a: torch.as_tensor(a, dtype=torch.float32).unsqueeze(0) return (as_t(env.daily[t]), as_t(env.weekly[idx(5, env.weekly.shape[0])]), as_t(env.monthly[idx(21, env.monthly.shape[0])])) def collect_trajectory(self, horizon=200): obs_seq, acts, rewards, values, log_probs = [], [], [], [], [] hidden = torch.zeros(1, 1, self.hidden_size) self.env.reset() for _ in range(horizon): inputs = self._slice(self.env.t) mean, value, hidden = self.model(*inputs, hidden) dist = torch.distributions.Normal(mean, scale=0.1) sample = dist.sample() log_prob = dist.log_prob(sample).sum(dim=-1) action = torch.tanh(sample).detach().cpu().numpy()[0] _, reward, done, _ = self.env.step(action) obs_seq.append(inputs) acts.append(sample.squeeze(0)) rewards.append(reward) values.append(value.squeeze(0)) log_probs.append(log_prob.squeeze(0)) if done: break return Rollout(obs_seq, torch.stack(acts), torch.tensor(rewards, dtype=torch.float32), torch.stack(values).detach(), torch.stack(log_probs).detach()) def _gae(self, rewards, values): # GAE (Schulman et al., 2016); bootstrap V(s_{T+1}) = 0 at horizon. advantages = torch.zeros_like(rewards) gae = 0.0 for t in reversed(range(len(rewards))): v_next = values[t + 1] if t + 1 < len(values) else 0.0 delta = rewards[t] + GAMMA * v_next - values[t] gae = delta + GAMMA * GAE_LAMBDA * gae advantages[t] = gae 

> 53

returns = advantages + values advantages = (advantages - advantages.mean()) / (advantages.std() + 1e-8) return advantages, returns def ppo_update(self, rollout): advantages, returns = self._gae(rollout.rewards, rollout.values) for _ in range(PPO_EPOCHS): hidden = torch.zeros(1, 1, self.hidden_size) new_log_probs, new_values = [], [] for k, inputs in enumerate(rollout.obs_seq): mean, value, hidden = self.model(*inputs, hidden) dist = torch.distributions.Normal(mean, scale=0.1) new_log_probs.append( dist.log_prob(rollout.actions[k]).sum(-1).squeeze()) new_values.append(value.squeeze(0)) new_log_probs = torch.stack(new_log_probs) new_values = torch.stack(new_values) ratio = (new_log_probs - rollout.log_probs).exp() clipped = torch.clamp(ratio, 1 - PPO_CLIP, 1 + PPO_CLIP) loss = (-torch.min(ratio * advantages, clipped * advantages).mean() + 0.5 * F.mse_loss(new_values, returns)) self.optimizer.zero_grad(set_to_none=True) loss.backward() torch.nn.utils.clip_grad_norm_(self.model.parameters(), 0.5) self.optimizer.step() def train(self, iterations=10): for it in range(iterations): rollout = self.collect_trajectory() self.ppo_update(rollout) log.info("iter=%d steps=%d reward_mean=%.4f", it, len(rollout.rewards), float(rollout.rewards.mean())) 

# References 

[1] Almahdi, S., & Yang, S. Y. (2017). An adaptive portfolio trading system: A risk–return portfolio optimization using recurrent reinforcement learning with expected maximum drawdown. Expert Systems with Applications, 87 , 267–279. [2] Anderson, R., et al. (2024). Long-history PCA in a dynamic factor model with weak loadings. Berkeley Center for Risk Management Research Working Paper .[3] Asness, C. S., Frazzini, A., & Pedersen, L. H. (2012). Leverage aversion and risk parity. Financial Analysts Journal, 68 (1), 47–59. 54 [4] Asness, C. S., Frazzini, A., & Pedersen, L. H. (2019). Quality minus junk. Review of Accounting Studies, 24 (1), 34–112. [5] Avellaneda, M., & Lee, J.-H. (2010). Statistical arbitrage in the US equities market. 

Quantitative Finance, 10 (7), 761–782. [6] Bai, Y., Gao, Y., Wan, R., Zhang, S., & Song, R. (2024). A review of reinforcement learning in financial applications. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.12746. [7] Bailey, D. H., Borwein, J. M., Lopez de Prado, M., & Zhu, Q. J. (2017). The probability of backtest overfitting. Journal of Computational Finance, 20 (4), 39–69. [8] Barigozzi, M., & Hallin, M. (2024). The dynamic, the static, and the weak: Factor models and the analysis of high-dimensional time series. arXiv preprint 

arXiv:2407.10653. [9] Baronyan, S. R., Boduroglu, I. I., & Sener, E. (2010). Investigation of stochastic pairs trading strategies under different volatility regimes. Manchester School, 78 (1), 114–134. [10] Black, F. (1972). Capital market equilibrium with restricted borrowing. Journal of Business, 45 (3), 444–455. [11] Blitz, D. (2025). Caveats of Simple Factor Timing Strategies. SSRN Scholarly Paper No. 5256938 .[12] Bloomberg L.P. (2025). Bloomberg Terminal financial data [Data set]. Retrieved February 1, 2025, from https://www.bloomberg.com/professional. [13] B¨ uhler, H., Gonon, L., Teichmann, J., & Wood, B. (2019). Deep hedging. 

Quantitative Finance, 19 (8), 1271–1291. [14] Campbell, J. Y., Lo, A. W., & MacKinlay, A. C. (1997). The Econometrics of Financial Markets . Princeton University Press. [15] Carhart, M. M. (1997). On persistence in mutual fund performance. Journal of Finance, 52 (1), 57–82. [16] Charpentier, A., ´Elie, R., & Remlinger, C. (2023). Reinforcement learning in economics and finance. Computational Economics, 62 (1), 425–462. [17] Chekhlov, A., Uryasev, S., & Zabarankin, M. (2005). Drawdown measure in port-folio optimization. International Journal of Theoretical and Applied Finance, 8 (1), 13–58. [18] Cho, K., Van Merri¨ enboer, B., Gulcehre, C., Bahdanau, D., Bougares, F., Schwenk, H., & Bengio, Y. (2014). Learning phrase representations using RNN encoder–decoder for statistical machine translation. In Proceedings of the 2014 

55 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP) ,1724–1734. [19] Choudhary, H., Orra, A., Sahoo, K., & Thakur, M. (2025). Risk-adjusted deep reinforcement learning for portfolio optimization: A multi-reward approach. 

International Journal of Computational Intelligence Systems, 18 , Article 126. [20] Dai, Z., Yang, Z., Yang, Y., Carbonell, J., Le, Q. V., & Salakhutdinov, R. (2019). Transformer-XL: Attentive language models beyond a fixed-length context. In Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics , 2978–2988. [21] Fama, E. F. (1970). Efficient capital markets: A review of theory and empirical work. Journal of Finance, 25 (2), 383–417. [22] Fama, E. F., & French, K. R. (1993). Common risk factors in the returns on stocks and bonds. Journal of Financial Economics, 33 (1), 3–56. [23] Fama, E. F., & French, K. R. (2015). A five-factor asset pricing model. Journal of Financial Economics, 116 (1), 1–22. [24] Feghali, G., & Villalon, D. (2015). Building a better equity market neutral strategy. AQR White Paper , AQR Capital Management, LLC. [25] Financial Modeling Prep. (2025). Financial Modeling Prep API: aggre-gated financial data [Data set]. Retrieved February 1, 2025, from https://financialmodelingprep.com. [26] Fischer, T. G. (2018). Reinforcement learning in financial markets: A survey. FAU Discussion Papers in Economics, No. 12/2018 .[27] Ganesan, G. (2011). A subspace approach to portfolio analysis: A focus on equity investments. IEEE Signal Processing Magazine, 28 (5), 49–60. [28] Gaˇ sperov, B., Beguˇ si´ c, S., ˇSimovi´ c, P., & Kostanjˇ car, Z. (2021). Reinforcement learning approaches to optimal market making. Mathematics, 9 (21), 2689. [29] Gatev, E., Goetzmann, W. N., & Rouwenhorst, K. G. (2006). Pairs trading: Performance of a relative-value arbitrage rule. Review of Financial Studies, 19 (3), 797–827. [30] Grinold, R. C., & Kahn, R. N. (2000). Active Portfolio Management .McGraw-Hill. [31] Hambly, B. M., Xu, R., & Yang, H. (2023). Recent advances in reinforcement learning in finance. Mathematical Finance, 33 (3), 437–503. 56 [32] Harvey, C. R., & Liu, Y. (2015). Backtesting. Journal of Portfolio Management, 42 (1), 13–28. [33] HedgeNordic (2015). Market Neutral Strategies: The Key to Alpha in any Market Direction . Stockholm: Nordic Business Media AB (HedgeNordic Special Report). [34] Huang, G., Zhou, X., & Song, Q. (2020). Deep reinforcement learning for long-short portfolio optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2012.13773. [35] Jegadeesh, N. (1990). Evidence of predictable behavior of security returns. 

Journal of Finance, 45 (3), 881–898. [36] Jegadeesh, N., & Titman, S. (1993). Returns to buying winners and selling losers: Implications for stock market efficiency. Journal of Finance, 48 (1), 65–91. [37] Jiang, Z., Xu, D., & Liang, J. (2017). A deep reinforcement learning framework for the financial portfolio management problem. arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.10059. [38] Khandani, A. E., & Lo, A. W. (2007). What happened to the quants in August 2007? Journal of Investment Management, 5 (4), 5–54. [39] Khandani, A. E., & Lo, A. W. (2011). What happened to the quants in August 2007? Evidence from factors and transactions data. Journal of Financial Markets, 14 (1), 1–46. [40] Koratamaddi, P., Wadhwani, K., Gupta, M., & Sanjeevi, S. G. (2021). Market sentiment-aware deep reinforcement learning approach for stock portfolio allocation. 

Engineering Science and Technology, an International Journal , 24(4), 848–859. [41] Krauss, C., Do, X. A., & Huck, N. (2017). Deep neural networks, gradient-boosted trees, random forests: Statistical arbitrage on the S&P 500. European Journal of Operational Research, 259 (2), 689–702. [42] Krogh, A., & Hertz, J. A. (1992). A simple weight decay can improve generaliza-tion. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 4, 950–957. [43] Li, C.-L., & Hsieh, C.-H. (2023). On unified adaptive Black-Litterman mean-variance portfolio management. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.03391. [44] Liang, Z., Chen, H., Zhu, J., Jiang, K., & Li, Y. (2018). Adversarial deep reinforcement learning in portfolio management. arXiv preprint arXiv:1808.09940. [45] Lim, E. Q. Y., Cao, Q., & Quek, C. (2022). Dynamic portfolio rebalancing through reinforcement learning. Neural Computing and Applications, 34 (9), 7125–7139. [46] Lo, A. W. (2002). The statistics of Sharpe ratios. Financial Analysts Journal, 58 (4), 36–52. 57 [47] Markowitz, H. (1952). Portfolio selection. Journal of Finance, 7 (1), 77–91. [48] Mnih, V., et al. (2016). Asynchronous methods for deep reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the 33rd International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) ,1928–1937. [49] Moody, J., & Saffell, M. (2001). Learning to trade via direct reinforcement. IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks, 12 (4), 875–889. [50] Orra, A., Choudhary, H., Sharma, A., & Thakur, M. (2025). Enhancing deep reinforcement learning for stock trading: A reward shaping approach via expert feedback. Knowledge and Information Systems, 67 (11), 11075–11094. [51] Parisotto, E., et al. (2020). Stabilizing transformers for reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on Machine Learning , PMLR 119, 7487–7498. [52] Patton, A. J. (2009). Are “market neutral” hedge funds really market neutral? 

Review of Financial Studies, 22 (7), 2295–2330. [53] Perold, A. F., & Sharpe, W. F. (1988). Dynamic strategies for asset allocation. 

Financial Analysts Journal, 44 (1), 16–27. [54] Pleines, M., Pallasch, M., Zimmer, F., & Preuss, M. (2022). Generalization, mayhems and limits in recurrent proximal policy optimization. arXiv preprint 

arXiv:2205.11104. [55] Pleines, M., Pallasch, M., Zimmer, F., & Preuss, M. (2025). Memory Gym: Towards endless tasks to benchmark memory capabilities of agents. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 26 (6), 1–40. [56] Prechelt, L. (1998). Early stopping — but when? In G. B. Orr & K. R. M¨ uller (Eds.), Neural Networks: Tricks of the Trade (pp. 55–69). Springer. [57] Pricope, T.-V. (2021). Deep reinforcement learning in quantitative algorithmic trading: A review. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.00123. [58] Schulman, J., Wolski, F., Dhariwal, P., Radford, A., & Klimov, O. (2017). Proximal policy optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347. [59] Sharpe, W. F. (1966). Mutual fund performance. Journal of Business, 39 (1), 119–138. [60] Sharpe, W. F. (1994). The Sharpe ratio. Journal of Portfolio Management, 21 (1), 49–58. [61] Shiller, R. J. (1981). Do stock prices move too much to be justified by subsequent changes in dividends? American Economic Review, 71 (3), 421–436. 58 [62] Spooner, T., Fearnley, J., Savani, R., & Koukorinis, A. (2018). Market making via reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the 17th International Conference on Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems (AAMAS) , 434–442. [63] Srivastava, N., Hinton, G., Krizhevsky, A., Sutskever, I., & Salakhutdinov, R. (2014). Dropout: A simple way to prevent neural networks from overfitting. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 15 (56), 1929–1958. [64] Stable-Baselines Team. (2025). sb3-contrib: RecurrentPPO (Version 2.7.0) [Com-puter software]. Retrieved February 1, 2025, from https://pypi.org/project/sb3-contrib/. [65] Sutton, R. S., & Barto, A. G. (2018). Reinforcement Learning: An Introduction 

(2nd ed.). MIT Press. [66] Valle, C. A., Meade, N., & Beasley, J. E. (2014). Market neutral portfolios. 

Optimization Letters, 8 (7), 1961–1984. [67] Wu, M.-E., Syu, J.-H., Lin, J. C.-W., & Ho, J.-M. (2021). Portfolio management system in equity market neutral using reinforcement learning. Applied Intelligence, 51 (11), 8119–8131. [68] Yang, H., Liu, X.-Y., Zhong, S., & Walid, A. (2020). Deep reinforcement learning for automated stock trading: An ensemble strategy. In Proceedings of the 1st ACM International Conference on AI in Finance (ICAIF ’20) , 1–8. [69] Ye, Y., Pei, H., Wang, B., Chen, P.-Y., Zhu, Y., Xiao, J., & Li, B. (2020). Reinforcement-learning based portfolio management with augmented asset move-ment prediction states. In Proceedings of the 34th AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , 1112–1119. [70] Ye, J., et al. (2024). From factor models to deep learning: machine learning in reshaping empirical asset pricing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.06779. [71] Zhang, Z., Zohren, S., & Roberts, S. (2020). Deep learning for portfolio optimiza-tion. Journal of Financial Data Science, 2 (4), 8–20. [72] Zhang, Z., Zohren, S., & Roberts, S. (2020). Deep reinforcement learning for trading. Journal of Financial Data Science, 2 (2), 25–40. 59