Title: 24432_Distortion_of_AI_Alignme.pdf

URL Source: https://openreview.net/pdf?id=bkZrAIWK0N

Number of Pages: 39

Markdown Content:
# Distortion of AI Alignment: Does Preference Optimization Optimize for Preferences? 

Paul Gölz 

Cornell University 

paulgoelz@cornell.edu 

Nika Haghtalab 

UC Berkeley 

nika@berkeley.edu 

Kunhe Yang 

UC Berkeley 

kunheyang@berkeley.edu 

## Abstract 

After pre-training, large language models are aligned with human preferences based on pairwise comparisons. State-of-the-art alignment methods (such as PPO-based RLHF and DPO) are built on the assumption of aligning with a single preference model, despite being deployed in settings where users have diverse preferences. As a result, it is not even clear that these alignment methods produce models that satisfy users on average — a minimal requirement for pluralistic alignment. Drawing on social choice theory and modeling users’ comparisons through individual Bradley-Terry (BT) models, we introduce an alignment method’s distortion : the worst-case ratio between the optimal achievable average utility, and the average utility of the learned policy. The notion of distortion helps draw sharp distinctions between alignment methods: Nash Learning from Human Feedback achieves the minimax optimal distortion of ( 12+o(1)) ·β (for the BT temperature β), robustly across utility distributions, distributions of comparison pairs, and permissible KL divergences from the reference policy. RLHF and DPO, by contrast, suffer ≥ (1 −o(1)) · β

distortion already without a KL constraint, and eΩ( β) or even unbounded distortion in the full setting, depending on how comparison pairs are sampled. 

## 1 Introduction 

Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF) [ 38 , 43 , 18 , 59 ] has become the dominant paradigm for aligning large language models (LLMs) with human values and preferences. In a typical alignment pipeline, human feedback is provided as ordinal comparisons between pairs of candidate model outputs. This feedback is used to fine-tune a pre-trained model, steering it toward the preferences expressed in these comparisons. A major limitation of RLHF and of many proposed alternatives (including DPO [ 43 ], ΦPO [ 5], KTO [ 24 ], SimPO [ 34 ], χPO [ 30 ]) is that they do not take into account that users will disagree on which model outputs are most useful or least harmful. A growing body of evidence — from both the general public and the research community [ 1 , 47 , 20 , 8] — suggests that this blind spot of current alignment methods can lead to unfair outcomes. For example, Chakraborty et al. [13] argue that RLHF may align with a majority group’s preferences and ignore the preferences of a minority. In this work, we study a more basic question: do current alignment methods reliably lead to a high average utility across the users? Even such a minimal requirement might not be automatically met since alignment methods such as RLHF were originally designed with a single, perhaps representative, user in mind whose noisy ordinal preferences are assumed to be consistent with an underlying utility model. As a result, RLHF fits a single reward model to the observed ordinal comparisons of a population of users with different utility functions, effectively constructing a utility function for a “mythical” representative user. Could it be that optimizing a model for this mythical user leads to poor outcomes on average for real users? More fundamentally, do ordinal preferences even contain enough information to ensure high average utility across a heterogeneous user population?    

> 39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025). y1y2
> ≻
> Preference Data
> Reward Model Large Pre -trained Model ( 𝜋 ref )
> via Maximum
> likelihood
> Users
> Finetuned model ( 𝜋 )
> Fitting to a
> “mythical” user
> 𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑡𝑜𝑟𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 =
> max
> 𝜋 ⋆AvgUtil (𝜋 ⋆)
> AvgUtil (𝜋 )

Figure 1: The typical RLHF pipeline. The preference optimization process begins by collecting comparison data from users with potentially diverse utilities. A single Bradley-Terry model is then fit to this data via Maximum Likelihood Estimation (MLE), producing a single reward model that represents a “mythical user” whose utility best explain the observed heterogeneous preferences. This reward model is used to fine-tune the pretrained policy. We define distortion as the ratio between the average utility of an optimal policy and that of the output policy, capturing how well the mythical user’s utility aligns with the true average utility. 

Distortion of alignment. To address these questions, we introduce the distortion of an alignment method, 1 which we define as the ratio between the optimal average utility of a policy (if the training process had access to users’ true utilities) and the average utility achieved by the fine-tuned policy. A larger distortion implies lower average quality relative to the optimal policy. This notion is adapted from social choice theory [e.g., 41 , 10 , 4], where distortion quantifies the loss in average utility caused by using a voting rule that relies solely on ordinal preferences rather than full cardinal utilities. Our setting departs from this classical formulation of distortion in two ways. First, we assume that users make pairwise comparisons probabilistically, following a Bradley–Terry model based on the user’s idiosyncratic utilities. This assumption of probabilistic comparisons enables much less pessimistic distortion bounds than in the classic, deterministic-choice setting while capturing heterogeneous preferences. Second, our model and distortion bounds reflect that, in alignment, the models’ generation policy is constrained to stay close to the pre-trained reference policy. These departures generate insights for both the social choice and the alignment communities. 

1.1 Our Results 

Our results address both the social choice setting with individual Bradley–Terry comparisons (Sec-tion 3) and the alignment setting (Section 4), which additionally constrains the policy to remain close in Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence to a reference policy. The social choice setting is a special case of the alignment setting, in which the proximity constraint is not binding. Besides RLHF, which coincides with the Borda voting rule in the social choice setting, we study the proposed alternative 

Nash Learning from Human Feedback (NLHF) [36 ], which coincides with the Maximal Lotteries [25 ]voting rule. Direct Preference Optimization (DPO) [ 43 ] is equivalent to RLHF in our analysis and hence has the same distortion (see Appendix F.3). We define these alignment methods and voting rules in Section 2. In Section 5, we discuss how our results extend to KL-regularized (rather than constrained) alignment methods and to generalized models of sampling comparison pairs. In this overview of results, summarized in Table 1, we present our bounds for the case where the number of sampled pairwise comparisons goes to infinity. In later sections, we accompany these statements with polynomially fast, finite-sample convergence bounds. Our results establish that some distortion is unavoidable: in the social choice setting (i.e., without KL constraints), if each user only provides a single comparison, we show through a non-identifiability argument 2 that, for each value β > 0 of the Bradley–Terry temperature, every alignment method (or, equivalently, any voting rule) will suffer a distortion of ( 12 + o(1)) β on some instances. This lower bound reflects a fundamental information bottleneck: even under Bradley–Terry generative 

> 1

While prior work has called for the study of distortion in alignment [ 21 ], or used alignment as a motivation for studying the distortion of voting rules [ 29 , 22 ], our work is to our best knowledge the first to systematically define and analyze the distortion of alignment methods. We discuss these related efforts in Appendix A. 

> 2

While the non-identifiability of mixtures of ranking models is well established [ 57 , 56 , 55 ], our result shows that the non-identifiability can be catastrophic , leading to unavoidable loss in average utility. 

2Table 1: Overview of distortion bounds by alignment method and setting.                                              

> Alignment Method Social Choice Setting AI Alignment Setting RLHF [59] ≤O(β2)Thm 2
> (Borda)
> ≥(1 −o(1)) βThm 5 ≥eΩ( β)Thm 6 / Unbounded in β* Thm 9
> NLHF [36] =(12+o(1) )βCor 4 (Max. Lotteries) =(12+o(1) )βThm 7
> all (one comparison per user/ Condorcet loser property) ≥(12+o(1) )βThm 3 ≥(12+o(1) )βThm 3 *comparison pairs sampled from a distribution over pairs.

assumptions, ordinal feedback is not rich enough to perfectly optimize for the average utility of a heterogeneous user population. If each user provides d ≥ 2 (possibly correlated) comparisons, the same lower bound applies to all voting rules that satisfy a probabilistic relaxation of the Condorcet loser criterion , a social-choice axiom widely satisfied by desirable voting rules, including Borda and Maximal Lotteries. As a result, this lower bound extends to RLHF and NLHF. In the social choice setting, we show that both Borda and Maximal Lotteries have a distortion that is bounded in β. Borda’s distortion lies between (1 − o(1)) β and O(β2), whereas Maximal Lotteries’ distortion is ( 12 + o(1)) β, matching even the lower-order terms of the lower bound. These results are of independent interest to the social choice community since they show that the introduction of randomized pairwise comparisons circumvents the necessary growth of distortion in the number of alternatives m. Recently, Goyal and Sarmasarkar [29] showed that the same Bradley–Terry assumption can reduce the distortion of specific voting rules in the metric distortion setting, where utilities are distances in a metric space. Our results show that the Bradley–Terry assumption has an even larger impact on general-utility distortion, where constant distortion is classically impossible, than in metric distortion. We derive the distortion bounds through a simple yet broadly applicable linearization lemma that sandwiches win-rates between linear functions, which can be generalized to other random utility models as well. These distortion bounds also carry implications for AI leaderboards such as Chatbot Arena [ 16 ], where heterogeneous user preferences across diverse tasks are aggregated via MLE under a single Bradley–Terry model — effectively equivalent to using Borda scores. We elaborate on these implications in Section 3.3. In the alignment setting, we show that NLHF maintains Maximal Lotteries’ optimal ( 12 + o(1)) β

distortion with remarkable robustness: regardless of the population’s utilities, how comparison pairs are sampled, the number of comparisons per user, the reference policy, and the bound on the permissible KL divergence, NLHF obtains a Ω(1 /β ) fraction of the highest average utility achievable within the KL-divergence bound. Though we present this result for KL-constrained NLHF, we show in Section 5 that this directly implies a similar distortion guarantee for regularized NLHF. In contrast, RLHF’s distortion can grow as eΩ( β) in the alignment setting and is even unbounded in β if the two outcomes to be compared are sampled in a correlated way rather than i.i.d. We discuss additional related work in Appendix A. 

## 2 Preliminaries 

Let A = {1, . . . , m } be a finite set of alternatives . The population of users is described by a probability distribution D over utility vectors u = ( u(1) , . . . , u (m)) , whose entries 0 ≤ u(x) ≤ 1

indicate a user’s utility for alternative x.3 The objective is to find an alternative x such that its average utility AvgUtil (x) := Eu∼D [u(x)] across the user population (also known as the utilitarian social welfare ) is as high as possible. We extend this notation to probability distributions π over alternatives by setting AvgUtil (π) := Ex∼π [AvgUtil (x)] .Both voting rules and alignment methods observe comparisons from n users. We model each 

i = 1 , . . . , n as a fresh user with independently drawn utility vector ui ∼ D . For exposition, we assume that each user i provides an equal number d ≥ 1 of pairwise comparisons. For each i,and for j = 1 , . . . , d , we independently draw alternatives xji , y ji from a fixed distribution μ over    

> 3Our assumption that utilities be in [0 ,1] is weaker than any of the three assumptions — unit-sum, unit-range, or approval [23] — made in classic distortion to avoid trivial infinite lower bounds.

3alternatives, in which the minimum probability mass μmin := min x∈A μ(x) is positive. 4 User i

then compares each pair {xji , y ji } (for j = 1 , . . . , d ) through a Bradley-Terry model based on i’s utilities: i prefers xji over yji (written “ xji i yji ”) with probability σ(β · (ui(xji ) − ui(yji )) ), where 

σ(t) := 1 /(1+ e−t) is the logistic sigmoid function and β > 0 is a temperature parameter, and prefers 

yji over xji (“ yji i xji ”) otherwise. 5 Whereas this specifies the marginal probability of each pairwise comparison, we make no assumption about the correlation between i’s choices. For example, i might derive the pairwise comparisons from a Plackett-Luce ranking, ensuring that the user’s comparisons are always consistent. 6 We set p(x  y) for the expected win rate Eu∼D 

[σ(β · (u(x) − u(y)) )] .

Social Choice Setting. A voting rule f observes the sampled pairwise comparisons {xji i

yji }i∈[n],j ∈[d] and maps them to a probability distribution over alternatives. For some m, D, β, d, μ,and the correlation between comparisons, the average utility of f for n samples is AvgUtil n(f ) := 

E[AvgUtil (f ({xji i yji }i,j ))] , where the expectation is taken over the pairwise comparisons. The 

distortion of f on D is the competitive ratio between AvgUtil n(f ) and the optimal average utility 

max x∈A AvgUtil (x) in the limit of n → ∞ samples, and the distortion of f the worst-case distortion over all D:

dist (f, D) := lim sup n→∞    

> max x∈AAvgUtil (x)
> AvgUtil n(f)

, dist (f ) = sup D dist (f, D).

For alternatives x, y , let #( x  y) := {(i, j ) | xji = x, y ji = y} denote the number of pairwise comparisons in which x beat y. The (normalized) Borda score [45] of alternative x is 

BC (x) :=      

> ∑
> y∈A#( xy)
> ∑
> y∈A#( xy)+ ∑
> y6=x#( yx)

,

i.e., the fraction of pairwise comparisons involving x in which it wins. The Borda voting rule chooses the winner uniformly among all alternatives with maximum Borda score. The Maximal Lotteries vot-ing rule first computes the margin matrix M ∈ Rm×m, where Mx,y = #( xy)−#( yx)#( xy)+#( yx) . It then con-siders a symmetric two-player zero-sum game in which player 1 selects alternative x1, player 2 selects alternative x2, and the payoffs are Mx1,x 2 for player 1 and Mx2,x 1 = −Mx1,x 2 for player 2. The max-imal lotteries rule returns a distribution π ∈ argmax π1∈∆( A) min π2∈∆( A) Ex1∼π1,x 2∼π2 [Mx1,x 2 ],i.e., a mixed strategy in Nash equilibrium. When several such π exist, our results hold for any choice. 

Alignment Setting. The alignment setting generalizes the social choice setting in two ways: first, user utilities ui(y | x) may depend on a state x; second, the goal in determining a policy π is not purely to maximize the reward AvgUtil (π | x), but a trade-off between this reward and the goal of remaining close to a reference policy πref (· | x) ∈ ∆( A) in terms of the KL divergence DKL (· ‖ πref ).For theoretical tractability, we focus our analysis on a single state x, which we from here on omit from the notation. Conceptually, this treatment of alignment on a state-by-state basis corresponds to an assumption that our policy class is expressive enough so that it can take the optimal distribution of actions at each state 7 and abstracts from the generalization problem of estimating the population’s preference between a pair of alternatives at the given state x based on preferences in similar states x′.Having set aside the dependency between states, we focus on how the regularization with respect to a reference policy impacts the ability to optimize the average utility of three alignment methods: RLHF, DPO, and NLHF. In addition to the pairwise comparisons, these methods take in a reference policy πref ∈ ∆( A) and a KL bound τ ≥ 0, and map these inputs to a policy π in the KL-ball 

Bτ (πref ) := {π ∈ ∆( A) | DKL (π ‖ πref ) ≤ τ } around the reference policy. RLHF, DPO, and NLHF are typically implemented with a KL regularization rather than our KL-constrained formulation, which we adopt to enable a comparison on equal terms. In Section 5, we show that these perspectives are equivalent, and that distortion upper bounds carry over to regularized alignment methods. 

> 4

In Section 5, we discuss how most of our results extend more general distributions over comparison pairs, which can, for example. capture k-wise comparisons. 

> 5

Should we sample the same alternative x = xji = yji twice for a pair, the user is not asked for a pairwise comparison. We record this as “ x i x”, in a slight abuse of notation. 

> 6

In particular, if we sample the same unordered pair twice for a user, the answers can be perfectly correlated. 

> 7

This assumption is common in the literature; see, for example, Rafailov et al. [43] ’s application of first-order optimality conditions of PPO loss minimization. 

4The RLHF method first estimates rewards for each alternative, using maximum likelihood estimation assuming that comparisons were generated by a single Bradley–Terry model: 

r := argmax r∈Rm

∑ 

> 1≤i≤n, 1≤j≤d

log (σ(r(xji ) − r(yji )) ).8

Next, RLHF uses PPO [ 44 ] to compute the policy πRLHF := argmax π∈Bτ (πref ) Ex∼π [r(x)] with maximum expected reward within the KL-ball. In our setup, DPO is equivalent to RLHF (see Appendix F.3) and thus has the same distortion. The alignment method NLHF was inspired in part by a desire to better align with the preferences of a heterogeneous group [ 36 ]. NLHF naturally adapts the definition of maxi-mal lotteries by constraining both players’ mixed strategies to the KL-ball, i.e., πNLHF := argmax π1∈Bτ (πref ) min π2∈Bτ (πref ) Ex1∼π1,x 2∼π2 [Mx1,x 2 ].To generalize the definition of distortion to alignment methods, we set the maximum average utility of any policy in the KL-ball as the benchmark. For fixed m, D, β, d, μ and correlation between pairwise comparisons, the distortion of alignment method f is 

dist (f ) = sup D,π ref ,τ lim sup n→∞      

> max π∈Bτ (πref )AvgUtil (π)
> AvgUtil n(f(·,π ref ,τ ))

.

## 3 Social Choice (or AI Alignment without KL Constraint) 

We begin the demonstration of our distortion framework in the social choice setting. From the perspective of alignment, this setting is the limit where the KL constraint (equivalently, KL regu-larization) to the reference policy vanishes. Hence, distortion measures whether the “direction” in which an alignment method pushes the pre-trained policy is aligned with average utility at all. Moreover, the social choice setting allows us to illustrate how the Bradley-Terry assumption over-comes the pessimism of classic deterministic-choice distortion. In the classic setting, high distortion — 

Ω( √m) even for randomized voting rules and under utility-normalization assumptions [ 10 , 23 ] — is unavoidable because a voting rule observes no signal about preference intensity , i.e., whether a user prefers a over b strongly or is merely breaking a tie between equally valued alternatives. Random Bradley-Terry comparisons would clearly side-step this problem if we could observe many samples of each pairwise comparison for a single utility vector : by consistency, the Bradley-Terry MLE would recover the utilities (up to an additive shift), allowing us to select the utility-maximizing alternative and achieve a perfect distortion of 1. It is not obvious, by contrast, that random pairwise comparisons will be similarly useful in our heterogeneous setting, where each observation is drawn from a mixture of users’ Bradley-Terry models. Because users are not labeled and may provide as little as a single pairwise comparison, there is no hope to cluster users and estimate rewards per cluster. Instead, a source of inspiration is an observation by Caragiannis and Procaccia [12] in a much simpler model, in which each user votes for a single alternative with probability equal to their utility (which is normalized to sum to 1). Since the probability of the event “ i votes for x” equals ui(x), the total number of votes of alternative x (i.e., ∑ 

> i∈N

1i votes for x) is an unbiased estimator of its total utility. For many samples, this estimator concentrates around its mean and allows to select the optimal alternative. 

Figure 2: Bounds on probability of pre-ferring x over y, β = 5 .

The argument would extend if some observed events from a user had a probability that is affine in the user’s utilities. Alas, we are not so lucky: the sigmoid function in the probability of the event “ i ranks x over y” is nonlinear, and we show in Theorem 3 that this nonlinearity makes a distortion of at least  

> β
> 21+ e−β
> 1−e−β

> 1 unavoidable. Though our observations’ probabilities are not affine in the utilities, we can bound these probabilities by affine functions, which ultimately powers our distortion upper bounds. As shown in Fig. 2, we sandwich the probability σ(β · (u(x) −

u(y))) that a user with utilities u prefers x over y between the affine lower bound β · (L u (x) − `β u(y)) + 12 and affine         

> 8Assuming that each x∈Awins at least one pairwise comparison against each y6=x, this optimization has a maximizer, which is unique up to additive shifts, by strict convexity.

5upper bound β · (`β u(x) − L u (y)) + 12 , for constants L, ` β defined below. By linearity, this bound extends to a bound of the expected win-rate p(x  y) = Eu∼D [σ(β · (u(x) − u(y)))] by affine expressions in AvgUtil (x) = Eu∼D [u(x)] and AvgUtil (y) = Eu∼D [u(y)] . We defer the lemma’s formal proof to Appendix C. 

Lemma 1 (Linearization of Expected Win-Rates) . Let L := σ′(0) = 1 /4 and `β := σ(β)− 12 

> β

= 

> 12β

· 1−e−β 

> 1+ e−β

. For any pair of alternatives x, y ∈ A, we have 

β · (`β · AvgUtil (x) − L · AvgUtil (y)) ≤ p(x  y) − 12 ≤ β · (L · AvgUtil (x) − `β · AvgUtil (y)) .

3.1 Upper Bound on Borda Distortion 

Siththaranjan et al. [46] observed that RLHF and the Borda voting rule are closely linked in that the Bradley-Terry MLE rewards are ordered by their alternatives’ Borda score. Hence, as the KL constraint relaxes, RLHF moves all of the policy’s probability mass on the Borda winner. Because Borda has infinite distortion in the classic setting [ 41 ], we would hope that distortion is more reasonable under our assumptions. Fortunately, Borda indeed has at most O(β2) distortion, which we prove through two applications of our linearization lemma: 

Theorem 2 (Borda Distortion Upper Bound) . For any instance D with any number of alternatives m,distribution μ over alternatives, and temperature β, Borda has at most distortion ( β 

> 2

· 1+ e−β

> 1−e−β

)2 =

O(β2). In the finite-sample regime, we have that 

AvgUtil n(Borda ) ≥ ( 2 

> β

· 1−e−β

> 1+ e−β

)2 · max x?∈A AvgUtil (x?) − O

( 1

> β2

√ log( mnβ ) 

> n·min {1,dμ 2min }

+ m log( mnβ )

> n·β2μ2min

)

.

Proof sketch (full proof in Appendix E.1). For exposition, we sketch this proof for n → ∞ , assuming that each alternative’s Borda count has converged to its expectation BC ?(x) := ∑ 

> y∈A

μ(y)·p(x  y).Let ˆx = argmax x∈A BC ?(x) be the Borda winner in the limit, and x? = argmax x∈A AvgUtil (x) be the utility maximizer. Applying Lemma 1 to the win-rates p(ˆ x  y) and p(x?  y) for all y ∈ A, we have that 

BC ?(ˆ x) − 12 ≤ ∑ 

> y∈A

μ(y) · β (L · AvgUtil (ˆ x) − `β · AvgUtil (y)) = β (L · AvgUtil (ˆ x) − `β · AvgUtil (μ)) ; (1) 

BC ?(x?) − 12 ≥ ∑ 

> y∈A

μ(y) · β (`β · AvgUtil (x?) − L · AvgUtil (y)) = β (`β · AvgUtil (x?) − L · AvgUtil (μ)) .

Since BC ?(ˆ x) ≥ BC ?(x?), we obtain from the above two inequalities that 

L · AvgUtil (ˆ x) + ( L − `β ) · AvgUtil (μ) ≥ `β · AvgUtil (x?). (2) A standard averaging argument shows that Ex∼μ[BC ?(x)] ≥ 1/2, which implies that BC ?(ˆ x) must be at least 1/2. Combining this with Eq. (1), we obtain that AvgUtil (μ) ≤ L`β · AvgUtil (ˆ x). Substituting this into Equation (2) (noting that L ≥ `β ), we have that  

> L2
> `β

AvgUtil (ˆ x) = L · AvgUtil (ˆ x) + (L−`β ) L`β · AvgUtil (ˆ x)

≥ L · AvgUtil (ˆ x) + ( L − `β ) · AvgUtil (μ) ≥ `β · AvgUtil (x?),

which yields the distortion guarantee AvgUtil (x?) 

> AvgUtil (ˆ x)

≤ ( L`β

)2 = ( β

> 21+ e−β
> 1−e−β

)2.

3.2 Lower Bounds (and Upper Bound for Maximal Lotteries) 

The upper bound for Borda nested two applications of the linearization lemma. As a result, it twice incurred a distortion factor of L`β = σ′(0) (σ(β)−σ(0)) /β , which measures the sigmoid function’s deviation from linearity in the relevant range. Below, we show that any voting rule must incur this factor at least once, at least for the case of d = 1 comparisons per user. This distortion occurs even though the voting rule has access to infinitely many pairwise comparison samples, which shows that the nonlinearity of the Bradley-Terry model can cause a loss of the information necessary to find the utility maximizer. 6The proof (in Appendix E.3) constructs a user population D in which a small minority has utility 1 for some special alternative a and 0 for all other alternatives, whereas the majority has a small utility 

 for all alternatives except for a, for which they have utility 0. The sizes of these blocs are balanced such that all expected win-rates are 1/2. Due to the diminishing returns in the sigmoid function, the resulting average utility for a is L`β times higher than that of the other alternatives. But since the pairwise comparisons observed by a voting rule are just independent Bernoulli draws with bias 1/2,all versions of the instance with permuted alternatives are indistinguishable. Since no voting rule can identify alternative a better than random guessing, they must incur L`β distortion. If there are d ≥ 2 observations per user, the above argument does not apply to all voting rules because an elaborate voting rule might use the correlations within a user’s comparisons to identify a. We can, however, extend the lower bound to d ≥ 2 for all voting rules that put at most 1/m probability mass on a Condorcet loser , i.e., an alternative x such that #( y  x) > #( x  y) for all y 6 = x.This property generalizes the Condorcet loser criterion and is satisfied by a wide range of voting rules deemed desirable, including Borda and Maximal Lotteries. The proof uses essentially the same instance as above, slightly tipping the expected win-rates against a to make it a Condorcet loser. Since the social choice setting is a special case of alignment, the lower bound extends to alignment. 

Theorem 3 (Voting Rule-Independent Distortion Lower Bound) . Fix any β > 0. If each user provides 

d=1 comparison, no voting rule can guarantee distortion better than β 

> 2

· 1+ e−β 

> 1−e−β

for large m. If each user reports d ≥ 2 pairwise comparisons, any voting rule that puts at most 1/m probability mass on a Condorcet loser must have at least the above distortion. 

The Maximal Lotteries voting rule exactly matches the above lower bound of β 

> 2

· 1+ e−β 

> 1−e−β

. We omit the proof here, as it follows as a direct corollary of NLHF’s upper bound (Theorem 7) in the next section. 

Corollary 4 (of Theorem 7) . The Maximal Lotteries voting rule has a distortion of β 

> 2

· 1+ e−β 

> 1−e−β

.

The Borda rule, in contrast, does not match this optimal distortion bound, as shown by the following bound that we prove and state in full detail in Appendix E.2. 

Theorem 5 (Borda Distortion Lower Bound, Informally) . For any β > 0 and m ≥ 3, the distortion guaranteed by Borda (and, hence, RLHF) is greater than and bounded away from β 

> 21+ e−β
> 1−e−β

. In particular, as β → ∞ , this distortion guarantee is at least (1 − o(1)) · β.

3.3 Discussion Implications for Social Choice Theory. Though we have presented these bounds in terms of their implications for alignment, they are of independent interest to social choice theory. In the 

classical social choice setting — where each voter’s ranking is produced deterministically, without any randomness such as that introduced by a Bradley–Terry model — the distortion framework (with nonnegative utilities) exhibits serious limitations. In particular, it leads to unreasonably high distortion and some unnatural prescriptions. For example, any deterministic voting rule has distortion 

Ω( m2), where optimal distortion is achieved by Plurality [ 12 ] (a rule widely disregarded by social choice theorists) whereas Borda and all Condorcet consistent rules have infinite distortion [ 41 ]. These limitations may explain in part why recent research activity [e.g., 28 , 14 , 29 ] has focused on the 

metric distortion setting [ 3, 4 ], in which many natural voting rules have constant distortion. But this comes at the cost of expressiveness: the metric setting assumes utilities are (negated) distances satisfying the triangle inequality. For example, the metric distortion setting implies that, if i has high utility for x and y, and j has high utility for x, then j must also have high utility for y, which need not be the case in our setting. We see our assumption of a user-specific random choice model as another way to make distortion a more practical criterion for choosing between voting rules. 

Implications for AI Leaderboards. Our results also have implications beyond being a special case of alignment. A notable example is LLM leaderboards such as Chatbot Arena [ 16 ], where users submit prompts, are shown the responses of two anonymized models, and select their preferred response. The leaderboard aggregates these pairwise comparisons by fitting a Bradley-Terry model via MLE, and ranking the models according to their estimated rewards. As in the alignment setting, this approach assumes a single latent notion of LLM quality, ignoring the fact that LLMs are used by diverse users for a wide range of tasks, each with their own goals, preferences, and prompt styles. This setting fits neatly into our social-choice model, where D captures a random user’s utility for the responses of different models to a random prompt (drawn from an arbitrary joint distribution over users and prompts), and AvgUtil quantified the average utility a model delivers for a random user and task, which captures the model’s usability . We defer a more detailed discussion to Appendix B. 74 AI Alignment with KL Constraint 

We now tackle the general alignment setting, in which the output policy π must be chosen within a prescribed KL divergence of the reference policy πref . This setting is more challenging than the social choice setting because even an alignment method that would choose high-utility alternatives in the absence of constraints might make poor use of a finite KL budget. 

4.1 Lower Bound for RLHF 

Before presenting the optimal distortion upper bound for NLHF, we illustrate the pitfalls of the alignment setting with a lower bound on RLHF. This bound shows that a KL constraint can cause RLHF to have exponential distortion in β, exceeding its quadratic upper bound in the social choice setting (Theorem 2). 

Theorem 6 (RLHF Distortion Lower Bound) . For m ≥ 3, there is a sequence of alignment problems on which the distortion of RLHF scales as eΩ( β) in β.Proof sketch (full proof in Appendix F.2). For ease of exposition, consider an instance with three alternatives a, b, c where μ(c) is about eβ times larger than μ(a) = μ(b).9 Let the population consist of a tiny minority (a Θ( eβ ) fraction) with utilities u(a) = 0 , u (b) = 1 , u (c) = 0 , and a large majority with utilities u(a) = 1 

> β

, u (b) = 0 , u (c) = 1 . Both a and b are likely to be beaten by c, but by carefully choosing the size of the minority, we can make p(b  c) > p (a  c), i.e., we can make b’s advantage of being preferred by the minority outweigh a’s advantage of being slightly less dispreferred by the majority. Since μ(c) is so much larger than μ(a), μ (b), the vast majority of pairwise comparisons involving a or b are against c. As a result, the MLE reward for b will be higher than for a, even though AvgUtil (a) = Θ( 1 

> β

) is exponentially larger than AvgUtil (b) = Θ( e−β ). (In the social choice setting, this would not be a problem because c has even higher average utility and higher reward.) The lower bound arises for a reference policy that puts a tiny probability mass ε on c, and 1−ε

> 2

probability mass each on a and b, together with a KL constraint of τ = log 2 . Now DKL (π ‖ πref ) = 

π(a) log π(a)(1 −ε)/2 + π(b) log π(b)(1 −ε)/2 + π(c) log π(c) 

> ε

. Since ε is very small, π(c) cannot be increased by enough to make a meaningful difference on the achievable utility; but the KL budget essentially allows to spread the probability mass of π freely between a and b. Since b has a higher MLE reward, RLHF puts almost all of π’s mass on b, which yields exponentially less utility than the utility-maximizing policy in the KL ball, which puts almost all mass on a.This bound formalizes a key limitation of the reward-based approach inherent to RLHF. The MLE phase of RLHF attempts to fit rewards to the observed comparisons, whose frequencies are determined by μ. Due to preference heterogeneity, not all three pairwise win-rates can be simultaneously fit by a reward vector, so the MLE sacrifices accuracy on the rarely observed pair {a, b } for higher accuracy of comparisons involving c. By placing so little mass on c, our choice of πref forces RLHF to choose between the misrepresented alternatives a and b, causing it to make a high-distortion choice. Our lower bound exploits that the distribution μ governing the frequencies of comparison pairs differs greatly from the reference policy πref . We leave open to characterize RLHF’s distortion under the assumption that μ = πref , for which we only know the lower bound Theorem 5. 

4.2 Distortion of NLHF 

While we saw above that a mismatch between input distribution μ and reference policy πref can lead RLHF towards highly suboptimal policies, NLHF has no such problem. Below, we show that, across all settings of our model, NLHF’s distortion exactly matches the lower bound from Theorem 3. Despite the generality of this result, the proof is no harder than our upper bound for Borda in the social choice setting and involves only a single application of the linearization lemma. It also highlights a key advantage over RLHF’s reward-based approach: Since the NLHF policy is computed as a Nash-equilibrium strategy in a game where the opponent might select any policy in the KL ball, the NLHF automatically “hedges” to perform well in expectation against all such policies, including the utility-maximizing benchmark π?. Since the social choice setting is a special case of alignment, this theorem immediately implies the distortion upper bound for Maximal Lotteries (Corollary 4), and both NLHF and Maximal Lotteries are minimax optimal by the lower bound in Theorem 3.      

> 9To avoid such unbalanced μ, one could equivalently copy alternative cmany times and let μbe uniform.

8Theorem 7 (NLHF Distortion Upper Bound) . For any instance D and any m, data distribution μ,temperature β of the Bradley-Terry model, and any reference policy πref and KL budget τ , we have 

dist (NLHF ) ≤ β 

> 2

· 1+ e−β 

> 1−e−β

. In the finite-sample regime, we have 

AvgUtil n(NLHF ) ≥ ( 2 

> β

· 1−e−β

> 1+ e−β

) · max π?∈Bτ (πref ) AvgUtil (π?) − O

( 1

> β

√ log( mn ) 

> n·min {1, d ·μ2min }

+ log( mn )

> n·βμ 2min

)

.

Proof sketch (full proof in Appendix F.1). For exposition, we assume that the NLHF method knows the expected win-rates p(x  y), and defer the proof of finite-sample guarantees. Hence, the NLHF policy by definition satisfies 

πNLHF ∈ argmax  

> π1∈Bτ(πref )

min   

> π2∈Bτ(πref )

Ex1∼π1,x 2∼π2 [p(x1  x2) − p(x2  x1)] .

Since this describes a Nash-equilibrium strategy for a symmetric two-player zero-sum game, and any such game has value 0, it must hold that 

min   

> π2∈Bτ(πref )

Ex1∼πNLHF ,x 2∼π2 [p(x1  x2) − p(x2  x1)] = 0 .

Plugging in p(x1  x2) − p(x2  x1) = 2 p(x1  y1) − 1, we obtain 

min π2∈Bτ (πref ) Ex1∼πNLHF ,x 2∼π2 [p(x1  x2) − 1/2] = 0 .

Using the utility-maximizing policy π? := argmax π∈Bτ (πref ) AvgUtil (π) for π2, we obtain that 

Ex1∼πNLHF ,x 2∼π? [p(x1  x2) − 12 ] ≥ 0.At this point, we upper bound the win-rate with the linearization lemma (Lemma 1), and obtain 

0 ≤ Ex1∼πNLHF ,x 2∼π? [β · (L · AvgUtil (x1) − `β · AvgUtil (x2))] = β · (L · AvgUtil (πNLHF ) − `β · AvgUtil (π?)) .

This implies that AvgUtil (π?) 

> AvgUtil (πNLHF )

≤ L`β = β 

> 2

· 1+ e−β 

> 1−e−β

= O(β), thus completing the proof. The simplicity of the proof above also speaks to its generality. For instance, the only property of KL divergence we used was that the feasible region Bτ (πref ) is a closed convex set (to ensure the existence of a Nash equilibrium). Consequently, the distortion bound of Nash learning extends to other ways of constraining proximity to the reference policy, such as by χ2 divergence [30]. 

## 5 Extensions of the Model 

KL Constraints vs. Regularization. In our model, we defined alignment methods as taking in an explicit KL bound τ as an input parameter, which is convenient for comparing the policy against a fair benchmark. In practice, however, alignment methods such as RLHF, DPO, and NLHF are regularized 

rather than constrained in terms of their KL-divergence. For example, the PPO phase of RLHF finds a policy π maximizing the regularized objective Ex∼π [r(x)] − λD KL (π ‖ πref ), and the payoff matrix in the game solved by NLHF is Ex1∼π1,x 2∼π2 [Mx1,x 2 ] − λD KL (π1 ‖ πref ) + λD KL (π2 ‖ πref ), where 

λ ≥ 0 is a regularization parameter given to the alignment method instead of τ .We prove in Appendix F.4 that the regularized and constrained versions of RLHF and NLHF are equivalent. That is, each policy π returned by the λ-regularized version of a method is optimal for the 

τ -constrained version for τ = DKL (π ‖ πref ) (and any policy returned by the τ -constrained version is optimal for the λ-regularized version and some λ ≥ 0). Through this equivalence, any distortion upper bound in our setting applies to the KL-regularized versions of the alignment method: if π results from the λ-regularized alignment method, π is optimal for the τ = DKL (π ‖ πref )-constrained version by equivalence, at which point the distortion upper bound shows that π can compete with any policy with no larger KL divergence from πref .10 Applying this observation to Theorem 7, we obtain the following guarantee for regularized NLHF: 

Corollary 8. If λ-regularized NLHF (for any λ ≥ 0) returns a policy ˜πNLHF , this policy’s average utility is at least a 2 

> β

· 1−e−β 

> 1+ e−β

fraction of the optimal average utility of any policy π with DKL (π ‖ πref ) ≤

DKL (˜ πNLHF ‖ πref ) (minus finite-sample errors, see Theorem 7). 

> 10

Why not define distortion by flexibly selecting the benchmark based on the output policy’s KL divergence? For this definition, an alignment method that always returns the reference policy would spuriously achieve distortion 1: because its KL divergence is 0, we would benchmark it only against the reference policy, i.e., itself. 

9Sampling of Comparison Pairs. In our model, we assume that each voter provides d pairwise comparisons, where both members xji , y ji of each comparison pair are sampled i.i.d. from μ. More generally, we can model {xji , y ji } ∼ ν where ν is a distribution over unordered alternative pairs, or even a distribution over d pairs of alternatives from which {x1 

> i

, y 1 

> i

, . . . , x di , y di } are sampled. (To keep the alignment methods well defined, we assume that each comparison pair has positive probability of being sampled.) The latter of these models can, for example, express k-wise (rather than pairwise) comparisons, if d = (r

> 2

) are all pairs inside a randomly chosen set of r alternatives. Almost all of our results continue to hold in these general models: the lower bound for all alignment methods that satisfy the Condorcet loser criterion in the social choice setting (Theorem 3), the exponential lower bound for RLHF (Theorem 6), and the upper bound for NLHF/Maximal Lotteries (Theorem 7) 11 .Given that our proofs continue to work out, the only “disadvantage” of these stronger models for sampling comparison pairs is that, without a distribution μ, the Borda voting rule is no longer defined (and we see no obvious way to generalize the Borda–MLE equivalence [ 46 , 42 ]). It seems that RLHF does not only become harder to analyze under these comparison-pair models, but actually performs worse: we show in Appendix G that RLHF can have a distortion that is not bounded in β in these extended models, leading to an even clearer separation with NLHF. 

Theorem 9 (Unbounded Distortion of RLHF Under Correlated Sampling) . For any β > 0, there exists a sequence of alignment instances and distributions ν ∈ ∆(( A

> 2

)) over comparison pairs such that RLHF’s distortion is unbounded. 

## 6 Discussion and Practical Takeaways 

In this paper, we introduced the notion of distortion for AI alignment. We showed that one such alignment method, NLHF, obtains the optimal distortion guarantee of ( 12 + o(1)) β. Putting this bound into perspective, if we assume that a user will rate a minimally preferred alternative over a maximally preferred alternative with 1% probability, this suggests a value of β = log 99% 1% ≈ 4.60 

and a distortion guarantee of about 2.34 , which is a quite reasonable worst-case guarantee. For the incumbent method, RLHF, our analysis gave more negative results. Its distortion was worse than NLHF’s in the unconstrained setting, exponentially worse in the constrained setting, and unbounded if the comparison pairs are not drawn i.i.d.. Given the ubiquity of RLHF, it is a pressing open question to fully characterize its distortion (especially when μ coincides with πref ) or find assumptions that guarantee a lower distortion. A major technical challenge is that bounding this distortion requires reasoning not only about the relative ordering of rewards but also their magnitudes. Beyond these theoretical contributions, our results yields several practical insights: 

Limitations of reward models as evaluation metrics. Our findings indicate that reward-model scores are unreliable proxies for human satisfaction, not only because of insufficient data diversity or scale, but also due to fundamental information-theoretic limits of cardinal-to-ordinal conversion. Due to this limitation, it may be valuable to complement reward-model evaluations with direct measurements of cardinal preferences, such as graded feedback or satisfaction scores. 

Sensitivity to post-training data distribution. The performance of reward-based pipelines such as RLHF is sensitive to the sampling distribution of pairwise comparisons, while the reward-free method NLHF shows greater robustness and theoretical tractability. As practitioners increasingly share or reuse post-training datasets across models and platforms, mitigating sensitivity becomes crucial. 

Potential failure modes. Although our lower-bound constructions are stylized for analytic clarity, they highlight patterns that may emerge in practice — for instance, systematic bias arises when comparisons frequently involve actions suppressed by the reference policy. Our theoretical frame-work provides a principled way to study such effects and to identify the structural features of data distributions that most influence worst-case misalignment. Finally, the distortion framework opens up many more questions: How large is the distortion of alignment methods besides RLHF, DPO, and NLHF? Can we extend the model to capture the generalization of preferences across states? Can distortion be reduced with a little additional information? And can we go beyond average utility to capture finer-grained notions? After all, high average utility is necessary, but not sufficient, for successful alignment to a heterogeneous population. 

> 11 The finite-sample bounds even improve in the latter model since each pair appears only once.

10 Acknowledgments and Disclosure of Funding 

We thank Mark Bedaywi, Jim Dai, Sonja Kraiczy, Soroosh Shafiee, and Eric Zhao for helpful conversations. This work was supported in part by the National Science Foundation under grant CCF-2145898, by the Office of Naval Research under grant N00014-24-1-2159, an Alfred P. Sloan fellowship, and a Schmidt Sciences AI2050 fellowship. Part of this work was performed while P.G. was at the Simons Institute for the Theory of Computing as a FODSI research fellow, for which he acknowledges the NSF’s support through grant DMS-2023505. 

## References 

[1] AI Incident Database. URL https://incidentdatabase.ai/ .[2] Mayer Alvo and LH Philip. Statistical methods for ranking data , volume 1341. Springer, 2014. [3] Elliot Anshelevich, Onkar Bhardwaj, Edith Elkind, John Postl, and Piotr Skowron. Approx-imating optimal social choice under metric preferences. Artificial Intelligence , 264:27–51, 2018. [4] Elliot Anshelevich, Aris Filos-Ratsikas, Nisarg Shah, and Alexandros A. Voudouris. Distortion in social choice problems: The first 15 years and beyond. In Zhi-Hua Zhou, editor, Proceedings of the Thirtieth International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, IJCAI 2021, Virtual Event / Montreal, Canada, 19-27 August 2021 , pages 4294–4301. ijcai.org, 2021. doi: 10. 24963/IJCAI.2021/589. [5] Mohammad Gheshlaghi Azar, Zhaohan Daniel Guo, Bilal Piot, Remi Munos, Mark Rowland, Michal Valko, and Daniele Calandriello. A general theoretical paradigm to understand learning from human preferences. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics ,pages 4447–4455. PMLR, 2024. [6] Hossein Azari Soufiani, David C Parkes, and Lirong Xia. A statistical decision-theoretic framework for social choice. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 27, 2014. [7] Yuntao Bai, Andy Jones, Kamal Ndousse, Amanda Askell, Anna Chen, Nova DasSarma, Dawn Drain, Stanislav Fort, Deep Ganguli, Tom Henighan, et al. Training a helpful and harmless assistant with reinforcement learning from human feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.05862 ,2022. [8] Yuntao Bai, Saurav Kadavath, Sandipan Kundu, Amanda Askell, Jackson Kernion, Andy Jones, Anna Chen, Anna Goldie, Azalia Mirhoseini, Cameron McKinnon, et al. Constitutional ai: Harmlessness from ai feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.08073 , 2022. [9] Gerdus Benade, Swaprava Nath, Ariel D. Procaccia, and Nisarg Shah. Preference elicitation for participatory budgeting. Management Science , 67(5):2813–2827, 2021. doi: 10/gjmmp3. [10] Craig Boutilier, Ioannis Caragiannis, Simi Haber, Tyler Lu, Ariel D. Procaccia, and Or Sheffet. Optimal social choice functions: A utilitarian view. In Proceedings of the 13th ACM Conference on Electronic Commerce , pages 197–214, Valencia Spain, June 2012. ACM. ISBN 978-1-4503-1415-2. doi: 10.1145/2229012.2229030. [11] Daniele Calandriello, Zhaohan Daniel Guo, Remi Munos, Mark Rowland, Yunhao Tang, Bernardo Avila Pires, Pierre Harvey Richemond, Charline Le Lan, Michal Valko, Tianqi Liu, et al. Human alignment of large language models through online preference optimisation. In 

Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Machine Learning , pages 5409–5435, 2024. [12] Ioannis Caragiannis and Ariel D. Procaccia. Voting almost maximizes social welfare despite lim-ited communication. Artificial Intelligence , 175(9-10):1655–1671, June 2011. ISSN 00043702. doi: 10/fknjz2. [13] Souradip Chakraborty, Jiahao Qiu, Hui Yuan, Alec Koppel, Furong Huang, Dinesh Manocha, Amrit Singh Bedi, and Mengdi Wang. Maxmin-RLHF: Alignment with diverse human prefer-ences. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.08925 , 2024. [14] Moses Charikar, Prasanna Ramakrishnan, Kangning Wang, and Hongxun Wu. Breaking the Metric Voting Distortion Barrier. Journal of the ACM , 71(6):1–33, December 2024. ISSN 0004-5411, 1557-735X. doi: 10.1145/3689625. 11 [15] Daiwei Chen, Yi Chen, Aniket Rege, and Ramya Korlakai Vinayak. Pal: Pluralistic alignment framework for learning from heterogeneous preferences. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.08469 ,2024. [16] Wei-Lin Chiang, Lianmin Zheng, Ying Sheng, Anastasios Nikolas Angelopoulos, Tianle Li, Dacheng Li, Banghua Zhu, Hao Zhang, Michael Jordan, Joseph E Gonzalez, et al. Chatbot arena: An open platform for evaluating llms by human preference. In Forty-first International Conference on Machine Learning , 2024. [17] Keertana Chidambaram, Karthik Vinay Seetharaman, and Vasilis Syrgkanis. Direct preference optimization with unobserved preference heterogeneity. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.15065 , 2024. [18] Paul F Christiano, Jan Leike, Tom Brown, Miljan Martic, Shane Legg, and Dario Amodei. Deep reinforcement learning from human preferences. Advances in neural information processing systems , 30, 2017. [19] Vincent Conitzer and Tuomas Sandholm. Common voting rules as maximum likelihood estima-tors. In Proceedings of the Twenty-First Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence ,pages 145–152, 2005. [20] Vincent Conitzer, Rachel Freedman, Jobst Heitzig, Wesley H Holliday, Bob M Jacobs, Nathan Lambert, Milan Mossé, Eric Pacuit, Stuart Russell, Hailey Schoelkopf, et al. Position: social choice should guide ai alignment in dealing with diverse human feedback. In Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Machine Learning , pages 9346–9360, 2024. [21] Jessica Dai and Eve Fleisig. Mapping social choice theory to RLHF. In ICLR 2024 Workshop on Reliable and Responsible Foundation Models , 2024. [22] Soroush Ebadian, Daniel Halpern, and Evi Micha. Metric distortion with elicited pairwise comparisons. In Proceedings of the 33rd International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI) , pages 2791–2798, 2024. [23] Soroush Ebadian, Anson Kahng, Dominik Peters, and Nisarg Shah. Optimized Distortion and Proportional Fairness in Voting. ACM Transactions on Economics and Computation , 12(1): 1–39, March 2024. ISSN 2167-8375, 2167-8383. doi: 10.1145/3640760. [24] Kawin Ethayarajh, Winnie Xu, Niklas Muennighoff, Dan Jurafsky, and Douwe Kiela. KTO: Model alignment as prospect theoretic optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.01306 , 2024. [25] Peter C. Fishburn. Probabilistic social choice based on simple voting comparisons. The Review of Economic Studies , 51(4):683–692, 1984. [26] Bailey Flanigan, Ariel D Procaccia, and Sven Wang. Distortion Under Public-Spirited Voting. In Proceedings of the 24th ACM Conference on Economics and Computation , EC ’23, page 700, New York, NY, USA, July 2023. Association for Computing Machinery. ISBN 979-8-4007-0104-7. doi: 10.1145/3580507.3597722. [27] Luise Ge, Daniel Halpern, Evi Micha, Ariel D Procaccia, Itai Shapira, Yevgeniy Vorob-eychik, and Junlin Wu. Axioms for AI alignment from human feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.14758 , 2024. [28] Vasilis Gkatzelis, Daniel Halpern, and Nisarg Shah. Resolving the optimal metric distortion conjecture. In 2020 IEEE 61st Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS) ,pages 1427–1438. IEEE, 2020. doi: 10.1109/FOCS46700.2020.00134. [29] Mohak Goyal and Sahasrajit Sarmasarkar. Metric distortion under probabilistic voting. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.14223v4 , 2025. [30] Audrey Huang, Wenhao Zhan, Tengyang Xie, Jason D Lee, Wen Sun, Akshay Krishnamurthy, and Dylan J Foster. Correcting the mythos of KL-regularization: Direct alignment without overoptimization via chi-squared preference optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.13399 ,2024. [31] Fatih Erdem Kizilkaya and David Kempe. Plurality Veto: A Simple Voting Rule Achieving Optimal Metric Distortion. In Proceedings of the Thirty-First International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence , pages 349–355, Vienna, Austria, July 2022. International Joint Conferences on Artificial Intelligence Organization. ISBN 978-1-956792-00-3. doi: 10.24963/ ijcai.2022/50. 12 [32] Zhihan Liu, Miao Lu, Shenao Zhang, Boyi Liu, Hongyi Guo, Yingxiang Yang, Jose Blanchet, and Zhaoran Wang. Provably mitigating overoptimization in RLHF: Your SFT loss is implicitly an adversarial regularizer. In The Thirty-eighth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , 2024. [33] Roberto-Rafael Maura-Rivero, Marc Lanctot, Francesco Visin, and Kate Larson. Jackpot! alignment as a maximal lottery. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.19266 , 2025. [34] Yu Meng, Mengzhou Xia, and Danqi Chen. SimPO: Simple preference optimization with a reference-free reward. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 37:124198–124235, 2024. [35] Abhilash Mishra. Ai alignment and social choice: Fundamental limitations and policy implica-tions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.16048 , 2023. [36] Remi Munos, Michal Valko, Daniele Calandriello, Mohammad Gheshlaghi Azar, Mark Rowland, Zhaohan Daniel Guo, Yunhao Tang, Matthieu Geist, Thomas Mesnard, Côme Fiegel, et al. Nash learning from human feedback. In International Conference on Machine Learning , pages 36743–36768. PMLR, 2024. [37] Ritesh Noothigattu, Dominik Peters, and Ariel D Procaccia. Axioms for learning from pairwise comparisons. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 33:17745–17754, 2020. [38] Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, et al. Training language models to follow instructions with human feedback. Advances in neural information processing systems ,35:27730–27744, 2022. [39] Chanwoo Park, Mingyang Liu, Dingwen Kong, Kaiqing Zhang, and Asuman Ozdaglar. RLHF from heterogeneous feedback via personalization and preference aggregation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.00254 , 2024. [40] Sriyash Poddar, Yanming Wan, Hamish Ivison, Abhishek Gupta, and Natasha Jaques. Personal-izing reinforcement learning from human feedback with variational preference learning. In The Thirty-eighth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , 2024. [41] Ariel D. Procaccia and Jeffrey S. Rosenschein. The distortion of cardinal preferences in voting. In International Workshop on Cooperative Information Agents , pages 317–331. Springer, 2006. [42] Ariel D Procaccia, Benjamin Schiffer, and Shirley Zhang. Clone-robust ai alignment. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.09254 , 2025. [43] Rafael Rafailov, Archit Sharma, Eric Mitchell, Christopher D Manning, Stefano Ermon, and Chelsea Finn. Direct preference optimization: Your language model is secretly a reward model. 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 36:53728–53741, 2023. [44] John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347 , 2017. [45] Ali Shirali, Arash Nasr-Esfahany, Abdullah Alomar, Parsa Mirtaheri, Rediet Abebe, and Ariel Procaccia. Direct alignment with heterogeneous preferences. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.16320 ,2025. [46] Anand Siththaranjan, Cassidy Laidlaw, and Dylan Hadfield-Menell. Distributional prefer-ence learning: Understanding and accounting for hidden context in RLHF. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.08358 , 2023. [47] Taylor Sorensen, Jared Moore, Jillian Fisher, Mitchell Gordon, Niloofar Mireshghallah, Christo-pher Michael Rytting, Andre Ye, Liwei Jiang, Ximing Lu, Nouha Dziri, et al. Position: a roadmap to pluralistic alignment. In Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Machine Learning , pages 46280–46302, 2024. [48] Gokul Swamy, Christoph Dann, Rahul Kidambi, Zhiwei Steven Wu, and Alekh Agarwal. A minimaximalist approach to reinforcement learning from human feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.04056 , 2024. [49] Gokcan Tatli, Yi Chen, and Ramya Korlakai Vinayak. Learning populations of preferences via pairwise comparison queries. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics , pages 1720–1728. PMLR, 2024. 13 [50] Yuanhao Wang, Qinghua Liu, and Chi Jin. Is RLHF more difficult than standard RL? a theoretical perspective. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 36:76006–76032, 2023. [51] Zhi Wang, Geelon So, and Ramya Korlakai Vinayak. Metric learning from limited pairwise preference comparisons. In Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence , pages 3571–3602. PMLR, 2024. [52] Yue Wu, Zhiqing Sun, Huizhuo Yuan, Kaixuan Ji, Yiming Yang, and Quanquan Gu. Self-play preference optimization for language model alignment. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.00675 , 2024. [53] Lirong Xia. Bayesian estimators as voting rules. In Uncertainty in artificial intelligence , 2018. [54] Lirong Xia. Learning and decision-making from rank data . Morgan & Claypool Publishers, 2019. [55] Xiaomin Zhang, Xucheng Zhang, Po-Ling Loh, and Yingyu Liang. On the identifiability of mixtures of ranking models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.13132 , 2022. [56] Zhibing Zhao and Lirong Xia. Learning mixtures of plackett-luce models from structured partial orders. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 32, 2019. [57] Zhibing Zhao, Peter Piech, and Lirong Xia. Learning mixtures of plackett-luce models. In Maria Florina Balcan and Kilian Q. Weinberger, editors, Proceedings of The 33rd International Conference on Machine Learning , volume 48 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research ,pages 2906–2914, New York, New York, USA, 20–22 Jun 2016. PMLR. [58] Huiying Zhong, Zhun Deng, Weijie J Su, Zhiwei Steven Wu, and Linjun Zhang. Provable multi-party reinforcement learning with diverse human feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.05006 ,2024. [59] Daniel M Ziegler, Nisan Stiennon, Jeffrey Wu, Tom B Brown, Alec Radford, Dario Amodei, Paul Christiano, and Geoffrey Irving. Fine-tuning language models from human preferences. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.08593 , 2019. 14 NeurIPS Paper Checklist 

1. Claims 

Question: Do the main claims made in the abstract and introduction accurately reflect the paper’s contributions and scope? Answer: [Yes] Justification: The abstract and the introduction clearly state the claims and contributions of this paper. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the abstract and introduction do not include the claims made in the paper. • The abstract and/or introduction should clearly state the claims made, including the contributions made in the paper and important assumptions and limitations. A No or NA answer to this question will not be perceived well by the reviewers. • The claims made should match theoretical and experimental results, and reflect how much the results can be expected to generalize to other settings. • It is fine to include aspirational goals as motivation as long as it is clear that these goals are not attained by the paper. 2. Limitations 

Question: Does the paper discuss the limitations of the work performed by the authors? Answer: [Yes] Justification: We discuss the limitations in Section 6. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper has no limitation while the answer No means that the paper has limitations, but those are not discussed in the paper. • The authors are encouraged to create a separate "Limitations" section in their paper. • The paper should point out any strong assumptions and how robust the results are to violations of these assumptions (e.g., independence assumptions, noiseless settings, model well-specification, asymptotic approximations only holding locally). The authors should reflect on how these assumptions might be violated in practice and what the implications would be. • The authors should reflect on the scope of the claims made, e.g., if the approach was only tested on a few datasets or with a few runs. In general, empirical results often depend on implicit assumptions, which should be articulated. • The authors should reflect on the factors that influence the performance of the approach. For example, a facial recognition algorithm may perform poorly when image resolution is low or images are taken in low lighting. Or a speech-to-text system might not be used reliably to provide closed captions for online lectures because it fails to handle technical jargon. • The authors should discuss the computational efficiency of the proposed algorithms and how they scale with dataset size. • If applicable, the authors should discuss possible limitations of their approach to address problems of privacy and fairness. • While the authors might fear that complete honesty about limitations might be used by reviewers as grounds for rejection, a worse outcome might be that reviewers discover limitations that aren’t acknowledged in the paper. The authors should use their best judgment and recognize that individual actions in favor of transparency play an impor-tant role in developing norms that preserve the integrity of the community. Reviewers will be specifically instructed to not penalize honesty concerning limitations. 3. Theory assumptions and proofs 

Question: For each theoretical result, does the paper provide the full set of assumptions and a complete (and correct) proof? Answer: [Yes] 15 Justification: We state our assumptions in each theorem, and provide a proof for each theoretical result in either the main body or the appendix. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper does not include theoretical results. • All the theorems, formulas, and proofs in the paper should be numbered and cross-referenced. • All assumptions should be clearly stated or referenced in the statement of any theorems. • The proofs can either appear in the main paper or the supplemental material, but if they appear in the supplemental material, the authors are encouraged to provide a short proof sketch to provide intuition. • Inversely, any informal proof provided in the core of the paper should be complemented by formal proofs provided in appendix or supplemental material. • Theorems and Lemmas that the proof relies upon should be properly referenced. 4. Experimental result reproducibility 

Question: Does the paper fully disclose all the information needed to reproduce the main ex-perimental results of the paper to the extent that it affects the main claims and/or conclusions of the paper (regardless of whether the code and data are provided or not)? Answer: [NA] Justification: This paper does not include experiments. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper does not include experiments. • If the paper includes experiments, a No answer to this question will not be perceived well by the reviewers: Making the paper reproducible is important, regardless of whether the code and data are provided or not. • If the contribution is a dataset and/or model, the authors should describe the steps taken to make their results reproducible or verifiable. • Depending on the contribution, reproducibility can be accomplished in various ways. For example, if the contribution is a novel architecture, describing the architecture fully might suffice, or if the contribution is a specific model and empirical evaluation, it may be necessary to either make it possible for others to replicate the model with the same dataset, or provide access to the model. In general. releasing code and data is often one good way to accomplish this, but reproducibility can also be provided via detailed instructions for how to replicate the results, access to a hosted model (e.g., in the case of a large language model), releasing of a model checkpoint, or other means that are appropriate to the research performed. • While NeurIPS does not require releasing code, the conference does require all submis-sions to provide some reasonable avenue for reproducibility, which may depend on the nature of the contribution. For example (a) If the contribution is primarily a new algorithm, the paper should make it clear how to reproduce that algorithm. (b) If the contribution is primarily a new model architecture, the paper should describe the architecture clearly and fully. (c) If the contribution is a new model (e.g., a large language model), then there should either be a way to access this model for reproducing the results or a way to reproduce the model (e.g., with an open-source dataset or instructions for how to construct the dataset). (d) We recognize that reproducibility may be tricky in some cases, in which case authors are welcome to describe the particular way they provide for reproducibility. In the case of closed-source models, it may be that access to the model is limited in some way (e.g., to registered users), but it should be possible for other researchers to have some path to reproducing or verifying the results. 5. Open access to data and code 

Question: Does the paper provide open access to the data and code, with sufficient instruc-tions to faithfully reproduce the main experimental results, as described in supplemental material? 16 Answer: [NA] Justification: This paper does not include experiments. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that paper does not include experiments requiring code. • Please see the NeurIPS code and data submission guidelines ( https://nips.cc/ public/guides/CodeSubmissionPolicy ) for more details. • While we encourage the release of code and data, we understand that this might not be possible, so "No" is an acceptable answer. Papers cannot be rejected simply for not including code, unless this is central to the contribution (e.g., for a new open-source benchmark). • The instructions should contain the exact command and environment needed to run to reproduce the results. See the NeurIPS code and data submission guidelines ( https: //nips.cc/public/guides/CodeSubmissionPolicy ) for more details. • The authors should provide instructions on data access and preparation, including how to access the raw data, preprocessed data, intermediate data, and generated data, etc. • The authors should provide scripts to reproduce all experimental results for the new proposed method and baselines. If only a subset of experiments are reproducible, they should state which ones are omitted from the script and why. • At submission time, to preserve anonymity, the authors should release anonymized versions (if applicable). • Providing as much information as possible in supplemental material (appended to the paper) is recommended, but including URLs to data and code is permitted. 6. Experimental setting/details 

Question: Does the paper specify all the training and test details (e.g., data splits, hyper-parameters, how they were chosen, type of optimizer, etc.) necessary to understand the results? Answer: [NA] Justification: This paper does not include experiments. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper does not include experiments. • The experimental setting should be presented in the core of the paper to a level of detail that is necessary to appreciate the results and make sense of them. • The full details can be provided either with the code, in appendix, or as supplemental material. 7. Experiment statistical significance 

Question: Does the paper report error bars suitably and correctly defined or other appropriate information about the statistical significance of the experiments? Answer: [NA] Justification: The paper does not include experiments. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper does not include experiments. • The authors should answer "Yes" if the results are accompanied by error bars, confi-dence intervals, or statistical significance tests, at least for the experiments that support the main claims of the paper. • The factors of variability that the error bars are capturing should be clearly stated (for example, train/test split, initialization, random drawing of some parameter, or overall run with given experimental conditions). • The method for calculating the error bars should be explained (closed form formula, call to a library function, bootstrap, etc.) • The assumptions made should be given (e.g., Normally distributed errors). • It should be clear whether the error bar is the standard deviation or the standard error of the mean. 17 • It is OK to report 1-sigma error bars, but one should state it. The authors should preferably report a 2-sigma error bar than state that they have a 96% CI, if the hypothesis of Normality of errors is not verified. • For asymmetric distributions, the authors should be careful not to show in tables or figures symmetric error bars that would yield results that are out of range (e.g. negative error rates). • If error bars are reported in tables or plots, The authors should explain in the text how they were calculated and reference the corresponding figures or tables in the text. 8. Experiments compute resources 

Question: For each experiment, does the paper provide sufficient information on the com-puter resources (type of compute workers, memory, time of execution) needed to reproduce the experiments? Answer: [NA] Justification: This paper does not include experiments. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper does not include experiments. • The paper should indicate the type of compute workers CPU or GPU, internal cluster, or cloud provider, including relevant memory and storage. • The paper should provide the amount of compute required for each of the individual experimental runs as well as estimate the total compute. • The paper should disclose whether the full research project required more compute than the experiments reported in the paper (e.g., preliminary or failed experiments that didn’t make it into the paper). 9. Code of ethics 

Question: Does the research conducted in the paper conform, in every respect, with the NeurIPS Code of Ethics https://neurips.cc/public/EthicsGuidelines ?Answer: [Yes] Justification: The research conducted in the paper conform, in every respect, with the NeurIPS Code of Ethics. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the authors have not reviewed the NeurIPS Code of Ethics. • If the authors answer No, they should explain the special circumstances that require a deviation from the Code of Ethics. • The authors should make sure to preserve anonymity (e.g., if there is a special consid-eration due to laws or regulations in their jurisdiction). 10. Broader impacts 

Question: Does the paper discuss both potential positive societal impacts and negative societal impacts of the work performed? Answer: [NA] Justification: We proposed a theoretical analysis framework rather than a model or technol-ogy, so there is no direct societal impact. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that there is no societal impact of the work performed. • If the authors answer NA or No, they should explain why their work has no societal impact or why the paper does not address societal impact. • Examples of negative societal impacts include potential malicious or unintended uses (e.g., disinformation, generating fake profiles, surveillance), fairness considerations (e.g., deployment of technologies that could make decisions that unfairly impact specific groups), privacy considerations, and security considerations. 18 • The conference expects that many papers will be foundational research and not tied to particular applications, let alone deployments. However, if there is a direct path to any negative applications, the authors should point it out. For example, it is legitimate to point out that an improvement in the quality of generative models could be used to generate deepfakes for disinformation. On the other hand, it is not needed to point out that a generic algorithm for optimizing neural networks could enable people to train models that generate Deepfakes faster. • The authors should consider possible harms that could arise when the technology is being used as intended and functioning correctly, harms that could arise when the technology is being used as intended but gives incorrect results, and harms following from (intentional or unintentional) misuse of the technology. • If there are negative societal impacts, the authors could also discuss possible mitigation strategies (e.g., gated release of models, providing defenses in addition to attacks, mechanisms for monitoring misuse, mechanisms to monitor how a system learns from feedback over time, improving the efficiency and accessibility of ML). 11. Safeguards 

Question: Does the paper describe safeguards that have been put in place for responsible release of data or models that have a high risk for misuse (e.g., pretrained language models, image generators, or scraped datasets)? Answer: [NA] Justification: The paper poses no such risks. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper poses no such risks. • Released models that have a high risk for misuse or dual-use should be released with necessary safeguards to allow for controlled use of the model, for example by requiring that users adhere to usage guidelines or restrictions to access the model or implementing safety filters. • Datasets that have been scraped from the Internet could pose safety risks. The authors should describe how they avoided releasing unsafe images. • We recognize that providing effective safeguards is challenging, and many papers do not require this, but we encourage authors to take this into account and make a best faith effort. 12. Licenses for existing assets 

Question: Are the creators or original owners of assets (e.g., code, data, models), used in the paper, properly credited and are the license and terms of use explicitly mentioned and properly respected? Answer: [NA] Justification: The paper does not use existing assets. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper does not use existing assets. • The authors should cite the original paper that produced the code package or dataset. • The authors should state which version of the asset is used and, if possible, include a URL. • The name of the license (e.g., CC-BY 4.0) should be included for each asset. • For scraped data from a particular source (e.g., website), the copyright and terms of service of that source should be provided. • If assets are released, the license, copyright information, and terms of use in the package should be provided. For popular datasets, paperswithcode.com/datasets 

has curated licenses for some datasets. Their licensing guide can help determine the license of a dataset. • For existing datasets that are re-packaged, both the original license and the license of the derived asset (if it has changed) should be provided. 19 • If this information is not available online, the authors are encouraged to reach out to the asset’s creators. 13. New assets 

Question: Are new assets introduced in the paper well documented and is the documentation provided alongside the assets? Answer: [NA] Justification: The paper does not release new assets. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper does not release new assets. • Researchers should communicate the details of the dataset/code/model as part of their submissions via structured templates. This includes details about training, license, limitations, etc. • The paper should discuss whether and how consent was obtained from people whose asset is used. • At submission time, remember to anonymize your assets (if applicable). You can either create an anonymized URL or include an anonymized zip file. 14. Crowdsourcing and research with human subjects 

Question: For crowdsourcing experiments and research with human subjects, does the paper include the full text of instructions given to participants and screenshots, if applicable, as well as details about compensation (if any)? Answer: [NA] Justification: The paper does not involve crowdsourcing nor research with human subjects. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper does not involve crowdsourcing nor research with human subjects. • Including this information in the supplemental material is fine, but if the main contribu-tion of the paper involves human subjects, then as much detail as possible should be included in the main paper. • According to the NeurIPS Code of Ethics, workers involved in data collection, curation, or other labor should be paid at least the minimum wage in the country of the data collector. 15. Institutional review board (IRB) approvals or equivalent for research with human subjects 

Question: Does the paper describe potential risks incurred by study participants, whether such risks were disclosed to the subjects, and whether Institutional Review Board (IRB) approvals (or an equivalent approval/review based on the requirements of your country or institution) were obtained? Answer: [NA] Justification: The paper does not involve crowdsourcing nor research with human subjects. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper does not involve crowdsourcing nor research with human subjects. • Depending on the country in which research is conducted, IRB approval (or equivalent) may be required for any human subjects research. If you obtained IRB approval, you should clearly state this in the paper. • We recognize that the procedures for this may vary significantly between institutions and locations, and we expect authors to adhere to the NeurIPS Code of Ethics and the guidelines for their institution. • For initial submissions, do not include any information that would break anonymity (if applicable), such as the institution conducting the review. 16. Declaration of LLM usage 

20 Question: Does the paper describe the usage of LLMs if it is an important, original, or non-standard component of the core methods in this research? Note that if the LLM is used only for writing, editing, or formatting purposes and does not impact the core methodology, scientific rigorousness, or originality of the research, declaration is not required. Answer: [NA] Justification: The core method development in this research does not involve LLMs as any important, original, or non-standard components. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the core method development in this research does not involve LLMs as any important, original, or non-standard components. • Please refer to our LLM policy ( https://neurips.cc/Conferences/2025/LLM )for what should or should not be described. 21 A Related work 

Reward-based and reward-free alignment methods. The RLHF pipeline typically includes first training a reward model via maximum likelihood estimation (MLE), then applying RL algorithms such as Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) [ 44 ] to optimize a policy that maximizes the reward [ 59 , 7]. Rafailov et al. [43] proposes an alternative approach, Direct Preference Optimization (DPO), which bypasses explicit reward model training by directly optimizing an equivalent objective derived from the closed form of KL-constrained reward-maximizing policy. While the original formulation is based on a single Bradley–Terry model, we show in Appendix F.4 that the equivalence extends to settings with heterogeneous preferences. Building on the DPO framework, several recent methods including χPO [ 30 ], RPO [ 32 ] and SimPO [ 34 ] have been proposed to improve the robustness and effectiveness. Azar et al. [5] introduce ΨPO, another reward-free method that optimizes the expectation of a Ψ-transformation of the win-rates estimated from the offline comparison data. When Ψ is the identity function, the resulting method — IPO — reduces to directly optimizing the normalized Borda count. Since RLHF is implicitly optimizing the normalized Borda count [ 46 , 42 ], this connection implies that IPO, DPO, and RLHF are all equivalent in the unregularized/unconstrained setting. Another reward-free method is Nash Learning from Human Feedback (NLHF) [ 36 ] and its vari-ants [ 48 , 52 , 11 ], which finds the Nash equilibrium of a game defined over the win-rate margins (i.e., p(x  y) − p(y  x)) via online learning or self-play style algorithms. Maura-Rivero et al. [33] point out that NLHF can be viewed as a natural generalization of the Maximal Lotteries rule in social choice. Wang et al. [50] consider finding the Nash equilibrium of the win-rate matrix and reduce the problem to multiagent reward-based RL. They provide an impossibility result, showing the optimal policy is indeterminate when the underlying ranking model (e.g., Bradley-Terry with certain temperature) is unknown. In contrast, our results show that even when the ranking model is known, the optimal policy can remain nonidentifiable due to preference heterogeneity. 

AI Alignment under heterogeneous user preferences. A growing body of recent works studies algorithms for AI alignment under heterogeneous user preferences. Siththaranjan et al. [46] points out that RLHF implicitly optimizes the normalized Borda count, which can lead to poor outcomes in the social choice setting. To address this, they propose Distributional Preference Learning (DPL), a method that estimates a distribution of score values for each alternative. Another line of work deals with heterogeneity by clustering user preferences and learning several reward models at once, then aggregate the learned reward models using various techniques such as max-min optimization, which optimizes the worst-case reward among all clusters [ 17 , 13 ], or through aggregation rules motivated by axiomatic properties in social choice theory [ 58 , 39 ]. Poddar et al. [40] proposes a variational inference approach that infers user-specific latent variables from preference data which enables steerable personalized language models. Chen et al. [15] proposes a framework based on the ideal point model, which learns a latent space of user preferences that can few-shot generalize to unseen users. 

Statistical and Axiomatic Perspectives on Preference Aggregation. Maximum likelihood estima-tors (MLE), which serves as the core of the widely-used RLHF pipeline, can be viewed as voting rules: given a set of rankings, they output a score for each alternative, thereby producing a single aggregated ranking. This connection was first observed by Conitzer and Sandholm [19] , who show that any scoring-based voting rule is a maximum likelihood estimator under a specific noise model. A rich literature in social choice theory has studied the axiomatic properties of such MLE-based voting rules under various randomized ranking models [ 6, 53 , 37 , 27 , 42 ]. Notably, Ge et al. [27] analyzes the axiomatic properties of MLE-based AI alignment methods under the Bradley-Terry model for linear utility functions. On the learning side, several works study the problem of learning mixture models from ranking data, see textbooks [ 2, 54 ] for a comprehensive overview. Recently, Wang et al. [51] , Tatli et al. [49] focus on learning metric spaces from pairwise preferences. Our work is notably related to the results on the non-identifiability of learning mixture of Bradley-Terry models from pairwise or k-wise preferences [ 57 , 56 , 55 ]. We build on these results to quantify the loss of utility due to non-identifiability by proving a voting-rule independent distortion lower bound. 22 Distortion of randomized voting and RLHF. The framework of implicit utilitarian voting, i.e., of comparing voting rules in terms of their distortion was introduced by Procaccia and Rosenschein [41] ,which has since sparked a large body of work — both in the original utility setting [ 12 , 10 , 23 , 26 , 9 ,23 ] and in the metric setting [ 3 , 4, 28 , 14 , 31 ]. Several recent works have highlighted the importance of using distortion as a metric to evaluate the quality of AI alignment methods. Dai and Fleisig [21] draw a conceptual connection between social choice and RLHF, and propose to apply the notion of distortion to RLHF. Goyal and Sarmasarkar [29] uses alignment as motivation for studying the metric distortion of probabilistic voting rules under Bradley-Terry and other random utility models, where the voters and candidates are assumed to lie in a common metric space satisfying triangle inequality. We not only study the non-metric distortion (which is more expressive), but also go beyond the social choice setting to consider the alignment setting in which output policies are constrained to remain close to a given reference policy. More broadly, our work also contributes to the growing line of research on the intersection of social choice theory and RLHF, as advocated in recent position papers [20, 35]. 

## B Distortion in AI Leaderboards 

The AI leaderboard setting fits natural into our social-choice model, where D captures a random user’s utility for the responses of different models to a random prompt (drawn from an arbitrary joint distribution over users and prompts), and AvgUtil quantified the average utility a model delivers for a random user and task, which we call the model’s usability .Since Chatbot Arena and RLHF are based on the same MLE, our distortion bounds on RHLF in the social choice setting imply that the usability of the top-ranked language model (i.e., the Borda winner) may be (1 − o(1)) · β times worse than the usability of some other ranked model (Theorem 5) (but at most by a O(β2) factor, see Theorem 2). Our results in an extended setting in which comparison pairs are drawn in a correlated way (Section 5) show that Chatbot Arena’s ranking is highly sensitive to the distribution of LLM pairs. For certain correlated distributions, the gap in usability could be unbounded (Theorem 9), which is concerning since Chatbot Arena adaptively oversamples new and highly ranked models. These findings suggest that current leaderboard rankings may not fully reflect true model quality. Could alternative aggregation rules, such as Maximal Lotteries or the Copeland voting rule, provide more accurate assessments of model usability and be more robust to the choice of sampling distribu-tion? Does adaptive sampling introduce systematic biases that exacerbate the distortion of current pipelines? Addressing these questions is an important direction for future work to ensure the fidelity of leaderboard-based evaluations. 

## C Linearization Lemma for Expected Win-Rates 

Lemma 1 (Linearization of Expected Win-Rates) . Let L := σ′(0) = 1 /4 and `β := σ(β)− 12 

> β

= 

> 12β

· 1−e−β 

> 1+ e−β

. For any pair of alternatives x, y ∈ A, we have 

β · (`β · AvgUtil (x) − L · AvgUtil (y)) ≤ p(x  y) − 12 ≤ β · (L · AvgUtil (x) − `β · AvgUtil (y)) .

Proof of Lemma 1. We prove this lemma by linearizing the sigmoid function σ(z) = 11+ e−z in the domain of z ∈ [−β, β ]. When z ∈ [0 , β ], the sigmoid function is concave and increasing, thus we have σ(z) ≤ σ′(0) · z + σ(0) = 12 + Lz , where L = 14 is the derivative σ′(0) . When z ∈ [−β, 0] ,the sigmoid function is convex, thus we have σ(z) ≤

(

1 + zβ

)

σ(0) − zβ σ(−β) = 12 + lβ · z, where 

lβ = σ(β)− 12 

> β

is the slope of the line connecting (−β, σ (−β)) and (0 , σ (0)) .Plugging the above bounds into σ

(

β · (u(x) − u(y)) 

)

, we have that 

σ

(

β · (u(x) − u(y)) 

)

− 12 ≤ β · (u(x) − u(y)) · (L · 1u(x)−u(y)≥0 + lβ · 1u(x)−u(y)<0

)

≤ β · (L · u(x) − lβ · u(y)) .

23 Finally, taking an expectation over u ∼ D , we have that 

p(x  y) − 12 ≤ β

(

L · E 

> u∼D

[u(x)] − lβ · E 

> u∼D

[u(y)] 

)

= β (L · AvgUtil (x) − lβ · AvgUtil (y)) .

This completes the proof of the upper bound. The lower bound follows from applying the same argument to p(y  x) and using the fact that p(x  y) = 1 − p(y  x).

## D Finite-Sample Convergence Bounds 

In this section, we use standard concentration techniques to derive finite-sample convergence bounds for the normalized Borda score and the empirical win rate. The lemmas presented in this section will serve as a building block for proving finite-sample guarantees for the alignment methods studied in Sections 3 and 4. 

D.1 Estimation Error of Win-Rates Lemma 10. For any instance D with any number of alternatives m, any distribution μ over alter-natives with μmin = min x∈A μ(x), and n i.i.d. users sampled from D where each user labels d

comparison pairs following the Bradley-Terry model with temperature β, we have that with probability at least 1 − δ where δ ≥ m2 exp 

(

− ndμ 2min 

> 8

)

, the empirical win rates pn(x  y) := #( xy)#( xy)+#( yx)

satisfies that: 

∀x, y ∈ A, |pn(x  y) − p(x  y)| ≤ O

(√ 

log( m/δ )

n · min {1, d · μ2min } + log( m/δ )

nμ 2min 

)

.

Proof of Lemma 10. We first bound the estimation error of pn(x  y) for a fixed pair x, y ∈ (A

> 2

).Here we assume x 6 = y without loss of generality, because the estimation error for the x = y case is 

0.Since each voter i ∈ [n] is asked to label d pairwise comparisons, if each of them are asked to label a pair {x, y } multiple times, their answer will be consistent. Therefore, we can equivalently rewrite the process of sampling pn(x  y) as follows: 1. Draw k1, . . . , k n

> i.i.d.

∼ Binomial (d, q ) to represent the number of times the i-th voter is asked to label {x, y }, where q := 2 μ(x)μ(y) is the probability that each comparison pair is {x, y };2. Draw p1, . . . , p n

> i.i.d.

∼ Bernoulli (p) to represent the preference of the i-th voter on pair {x, y },where p := p(x  y) is the probability that a fresh voter prefers x over y. In particular, we have pi ⊥ ki because the sampling of voters and comparison pairs are independent; 3. Each voter i ∈ [n] contributes ki · pi to #( x  y) and ki · (1 − pi) to #( y  x).As a result, the empirical win rate pn(x  y) can be rewritten as: 

pn(x  y) = #( x  y)#( x  y) + #( y  x) =

∑ni=1 kipi

∑ni=1 ki

.

The error term is then given by: 

pn(x  y) − p(x  y) = 

∑ni=1 kipi

∑ni=1 ki

− p =

∑ni=1 ki(pi − p)

∑ni=1 ki

.

Now we use Bernstein’s inequality to bound the numerator. We start by bounding the variance of random variable Zi := ki(pi − p). Note that E [Zi] = E [ki] · E [pi − p] = 0 because ki and pi − p

are independent. Therefore, we have 

Var ( Zi) = E [Z2

> i

] = E [k2

> i

] · E [(pi − p)2] ≤ E [k2

> i

] = Var ( ki) + ( E [ki]) 2 = dq (1 − q) + d2q2.

24 According to Bernstein’s inequality, we have that with probability at least 1 − δ,

∣∣∣∣∣

> n

∑

> i=1

Zi

∣∣∣∣∣ =

∣∣∣∣∣

> n

∑

> i=1

ki(pi − p)

∣∣∣∣∣ ≤ √2n(dq (1 − q) + d2q2) log(2 /δ ) + 3 d log(2 /δ ). (3) Now we bound the denominator. Note that E [ki] = dq and Var ( ki) = dq (1 − q). From the Chernoff bound, we have that with probability at least 1 − e− ndq  

> 8

,

> n

∑

> i=1

ki ≥ n E [ki]2 = ndq 

2 . (4) Combining the bounds in Equation (3) and Equation (4), we have that when δ ≥ e− ndq  

> 8

, with probability at least 1 − 2δ, for a fixed pair x, y ∈ A, we have 

|pn(x  y) − p(x  y)| ≤ 

√2n(dq (1 − q) + d2q2) log(2 /δ ) + 3 d log(2 /δ )

ndq/ 2

≤ O

(√ 

(1 − q + dq ) log(1 /δ )

ndq + log(1 /δ )

nq 

)

where we use the fact that 1−q+dq dq ≤ 2min {1,dq } and q = 2 μ(x)μ(y) ≥ μ2min to obtain: 

≤ O

(√ 

log(1 /δ )

n min {1, d · μ2min } + log(1 /δ )

nμ 2min 

)

.

Finally, by union bound over all (m

> 2

) pairs, we have that with probability at least 1 − δ where 

δ ≥ m2 exp 

(

− ndμ 2min 

> 8

)

, the following holds simultaneously for all x, y ∈ A:

|pn(x  y) − p(x  y)| ≤ O

(√ 

log( m/δ )

n · min {1, d · μ2min } + log( m/δ )

nμ 2min 

)

.

The proof is complete. 

D.2 Estimation Error of Normalized Borda Score Lemma 11. For any instance D with any number of alternatives m, any distribution μ over alter-natives with μmin = min x∈A μ(x), and n i.i.d. users sampled from D where each user labels d

comparison pairs, the normalized Borda score BC n(x) of any alternative x ∈ A satisfies that with probability at least 1 − δ where δ ≥ 2m exp( − ndμ min  

> 8

),

∀x ∈ A, |BC n(x) − BC ?(x)| ≤ O

(√ 

log( m/δ )

n · min {1, d · μ2min } + m log( m/δ )

nμ min 

)

, (5) 

where BC ?(x) is the limiting normalized Borda score of candidate x, defined as 

BC ?(x) := ∑

> y∈A

μ(y) · p(x  y) = 12 μ(x) + ∑ 

> y6=x

μ(y) · p(x  y). (6) 

Proof. We first bound the estimation error |BC n(x) − BC ?(x)| for a fixed alternative x ∈ A. For notational simplicity, we use Tn(x) to denote the number of comparison pairs involving x, and Wn(x)

to denote the number of comparison pairs where x is the winner, i.e., 

Tn(x) = 2#( x  x) + ∑ 

> y6=x

#( x  y) + #( y  x), Wn(x) = #( x  x) + ∑ 

> y6=x

#( x  y).

25 The normalized Borda score of x is then given by BC n(x) = Wn(x) 

> Tn(x)

. It is then easy to see that 

E [Tn(x)] = nd 

2μ(x)2 + ∑ 

> y6=x

2μ(x)μ(y)

 = 2 ndμ (x); 

E [Wn(x)] = nd 

μ(x)2 + ∑ 

> y6=x

μ(x)μ(y)p(x  y)

 = ndμ (x)

 12 μ(x) + ∑ 

> y6=x

μ(y)p(x  y)

 .

The limiting Borda score BC ?(x) is then given by the ratio of the above two expectations, i.e., 

BC ?(x) = E [Wn(x)] 

E [Tn(x)] = 12 μ(x) + ∑ 

> y6=x

μ(y)p(x  y).

We can thus decompose the estimation error |BC n(x) − BC ?(x)| as follows: 

|BC n(x) − BC ?(x)| =

∣∣∣∣

Wn(x)

Tn(x) − E [Wn(x)] 

E [Tn(x)] 

∣∣∣∣

≤ |Wn(x) − E [Wn(x)] |

Tn(x) + E [Wn(x)] 

E [Tn(x)] 

︸ ︷︷ ︸

> BC ?(x)≤1

· |Tn(x) − E [Tn(x)] |

Tn(x)

≤ |Wn(x) − E [Wn(x)] |

Tn(x) + |Tn(x) − E [Tn(x)] |

Tn(x) .

Now we bound the two terms |Wn(x) − E [Wn(x)] | and |Tn(x) − E [Tn(x)] | separately, and apply the union bound at the end. 

(I). Bounding |Wn(x) − E [Wn(x)] |: For each y 6 = x, we can write bound the deviation |#( x 

y) − E [#( x  y)] | using the same argument as in the proof of Lemma 10. Specifically, we can write #( x  y) as a sum of i.i.d. random variables kipi where ki ∼ Binomial (d, q x,y ) and 

pi ∼ Bernoulli (p(x  y)) , where qx,y = 2 μ(x)μ(y) is the probability that each comparison pair is 

{x, y }. Therefore, we have 

Var ( kipi) = Var ( ki) · Var ( pi) + Var ( ki) E [p2

> i

] + Var ( pi) E [ki]2

≤ 2dq x,y (1 − qx,y + dq x,y )

since 1 − qx,y + dq x,y ≤ 2dq x,y   

> min {1,dq x,y }

≤ 2dq x,y  

> min {1,dμ 2min }

, we can further bound the variance as 

≤ 2( dq x,y )2

min {1, dμ 2min } = 8( dμ (x)μ(y)) 2

min {1, dμ 2min } .

Thus, by Bernstein’s inequality, with probability at least 1 − δ′,

∣∣∣#( x  y) − E [#( x  y)] 

∣∣∣ ≤ 4dμ (x)μ(y)

√

n log(2 /δ ′)min {1, d · μ2min } + 3 d log(2 /δ ′).

On the other hand, for the comparison of x with itself, we have that #( x  x) ∼

Binomial (nd, μ (x)2). Therefore, with probability at least 1 − δ′,

∣∣∣#( x  x) − E [#( x  x)] 

∣∣∣ ≤ √2ndμ (x)2 log(2 /δ ′) + 3 d log(2 /δ ′)

≤ 4dμ (x)2

√

n log(2 /δ ′)min {1, d · μ2min } + 3 d log(2 /δ ′).

26 Applying a union bound over all the m alternatives y ∈ A, we have that with probability at least 

1 − mδ ′,

|Wn(x) − E [Wn(x)] | ≤ ∑ 

> y6=x

∣∣∣#( x  y) − E [#( x  y)] 

∣∣∣

≤ ∑ 

> y6=x

(

4dμ (x)μ(y)

√

n log(2 /δ ′)min {1, d · μ2min } + 3 d log(2 /δ ′)

)

≤ 4dμ (x)

√

n log(2 /δ ′)min {1, d · μ2min } + 3 md log(2 /δ ′).

(II). Bounding |Tn(x) − E [Tn(x)] |: We can write Tn(x) as a sum of i.i.d. random variables: 

Tn =

> n

∑

> i=1
> d

∑

> j=1

(1xji =x + 1yji =x)

Since each comparison pair xji , y ji is sampled independently from μ × μ, we have that Tn ∼

Binomial (2 nd, μ (x)) . Therefore, with probability at least 1 − δ′,

∣∣∣Tn(x) − E [Tn(x)] 

∣∣∣ ≤ 2√ndμ (x) log(2 /δ ′) + 3 log(2 /δ ′).

In addition, with probability at least 1 − exp( − ndμ (x)4 ), we also have 

Tn ≥ E [Tn]2 = ndμ (x).

(III). Combining the two bounds: Finally, combining the above bounds on |Wn(x) − E [Wn(x)] |

and |Tn(x) − E [Tn(x)] |, together with the bound on the denominator Tn(x), we have that with probability at least 1 − 2mδ ′ − exp( − ndμ (x)4 ),

|BC n(x) − BC ?(x)| ≤ |Wn(x) − E [Wn(x)] |

Tn(x) + |Tn(x) − E [Tn(x)] |

Tn(x)

. 1

ndμ (x)

(

dμ (x)

√

n log(1 /δ ′)min {1, d · μ2min } + md log(1 /δ ′) + √ndμ (x) log(2 /δ ′)

)

.

√

log(1 /δ ′)

n · min {1, d · μ2min } + m log(1 /δ ′)

nμ min 

.

Finally, setting δ′ = δ 

> 4m2

and taking a union bound over all the m alternatives x ∈ A, we have that when δ ≥ 2m exp( − ndμ min  

> 8

), with probability at least 1 − δ, the above bound holds simultaneously for all x ∈ A. This completes the proof. 

## E Supplemental Materials for Section 3 

E.1 Upper Bound for Borda Theorem 2 (Borda Distortion Upper Bound) . For any instance D with any number of alternatives m,distribution μ over alternatives, and temperature β, Borda has at most distortion ( β 

> 2

· 1+ e−β

> 1−e−β

)2 =

O(β2). In the finite-sample regime, we have that 

AvgUtil n(Borda ) ≥ ( 2 

> β

· 1−e−β

> 1+ e−β

)2 · max x?∈A AvgUtil (x?) − O

( 1

> β2

√ log( mnβ ) 

> n·min {1,dμ 2min }

+ m log( mnβ )

> n·β2μ2min

)

.

Proof of Theorem 2. From Lemma 11, we have that with probability at least 1 − δ, all x ∈ A satisfy that |BC n(x) − BC ?(x)| ≤ εn,d (δ), where 

εn,d (δ) = O

(√ 

log( m/δ )

n · min {1, d · μ2min } + m log( m/δ )

nμ min 

)

.

27 Following the proof sketch in Section 3.1, we use ˆx = argmax x∈A BC n(x) to denote the Borda winner, and x? = argmax x∈A AvgUtil (x) to denote the true welfare maximizer. Since BC n(ˆ x) ≥ BC n(x?), we have 

BC ?(ˆ x) − BC ?(x?) ≥ − 2εn,d (δ). (7) For the limiting Borda score BC ?(x), the argument in Section 3.1 shows that 

BC ?(ˆ x) − BC ?(x?) ≤ β · (L · AvgUtil (ˆ x) − `β · AvgUtil (x?) + ( L − `β ) · AvgUtil (μ)) 

≤ β ·

( L2

`β

· AvgUtil (ˆ x) − `β · AvgUtil (x?)

)

(8) Therefore, Combining Equations (7) and (8), we have 

−2εn,d (δ) ≤ β ·

( L2

`β

· AvgUtil (ˆ x) − `β · AvgUtil (x?)

)

⇒ AvgUtil (ˆ x) ≥

( `β

L

)2

AvgUtil (x?) − 2`β · εn,d (δ)

βL 2 .

Combining this with the failure probability δ of the above argument, the expected social welfare 

AvgUtil n(Borda ) satisfies that 

AvgUtil n(Borda ) ≥ (1 − δ) ·

(( `β

L

)2

AvgUtil (x?) − 2`β · εn,d (δ)

βL 2

)

≥

( `β

L

)2

AvgUtil (x?) − O

(

εn,d (δ)

β ·

( `β

L

)

+ δ ·

( `β

L

)2)

.

Finally, we set the failure probability to be 

δ = Θ 

(

Lβ · `β

·

√

1

n · min {1, d · μ2min }

)

(which satisfies the condition in Lemma 11 for large n), we have 

AvgUtil n(Borda ) ≥

( `β

L

)2

AvgUtil (x?) − O

(

1

β2

√

log( mnβ )

n · min {1, dμ 2min } + m log( mnβ )

n · β2μ2min 

)

,

which completes the proof. 

E.2 Lower Bound for Borda 0 2 5 10 20 50 ∞ β 

> 0.5 0.75 11.25 1.5
> distortion
> β
> NLHF/Maximum Lotteries
> RLHF/Borda lower bound

Figure 3: Comparison of the distortion achieved by NLHF/Maximum Lotteries and the lower bound on RLHF/Borda in Theorem 5, both as a fraction of β. The figure illustrates that NLHF has a worse distortion for every value of β > 0 (for worst-case distributions μ); in particular, the distortion of RLHF for large β is at least β − o(β), whereas the distortion of NLHF is β/ 2 + o(β).28 Theorem 12 (Lower Bound for Borda; Formal Version of Theorem 5) . For any β > 0 and m ≥ 3, the Borda voting rule (and, hence, RHLF) cannot guarantee a distortion better than max 0<γ< 1 β 

> 21+ e−β
> 1−e−β

·

(1 − γ + σ(βγ )−1/2

> σ(β)−1/2

). This bound is strictly higher than the voting-rule independent lower bound  

> β
> 21+ e−β
> 1−e−β

for all β and is at least (1 − o(1)) β as β → ∞ .Proof of Theorem 12. Without loss of generality, we may assume that m = 3 . If m > 3, we can repeatedly “split” some alternative x in two new alternatives y, y ′ (where each user has the utility for 

y, y ′ as for the original alternative x, and μ(y) + μ(y′) is equal to the original mass of x in μ). In this operation, the social welfares and Borda scores of y, y ′ in the new instance are equal to the social welfare and Borda score of x in the original instance, and the social welfares and Borda scores of all other alternatives do not change. For any 0 <  < 1, 0 ≤ ′ < 1 − , and 0 < γ < 1, consider the following distribution D of utilities over alternatives (a, b, c ):

(u(a), u (b), u (c)) = 



(1 − γ, 1, 0) with probability pA := σ(β )−1/2

> σ(β)+ σ(β )−1

(1 , 0,  ) with probability pB := pA · σ(βγ )−1/2

> σ(β)−1/2

(0 , 0,  + ′) with probability 1 − pA − pB .One verifies that 0 < p A, p B and pA + pB < 1, so this describes a valid probability distribution for all ,  ′, γ and each type of utilities has positive probability of being drawn. Assuming that ′ = 0 , it must be true that p(b  c) = 1 /2 = p(c  b) because 

pA · σ(β(1 − 0)) + (1 − pA) · σ(β(0 − )) = pA · (σ(β) − σ(−β )

︸ ︷︷ ︸

> =1 −σ(β )

) + σ(−β )

︸ ︷︷ ︸

> =1 −σ(β )

= pA · (σ(β) + σ(β ) − 1) + 1 − σ(β )= σ(β ) − 1/2 + 1 − σ(β ) = 1 /2.

If ′ > 0, it must be the case that p(c  b) > 1/2 by monotonicity. A similar chain of algebra shows that p(a  b) = 1 /2 = p(b  a):

pA · σ(−βγ ) + pB · σ(β) + 1−pA−pB 

> 2

= pA · (σ(−βγ ) − 1/2)︸ ︷︷ ︸

> =1 /2−σ(βγ )

+ pB · (σ(β) − 1/2)︸ ︷︷ ︸

> =pA·(σ(βγ )−1/2)

+1 /2 = 1 /2.

For any , γ and positive ′, note that, as the number of samples goes to infinity, the Borda score of the alternatives concentrate around their expected values: 

BC (a) → 12 μ(a) + 12 μ(b) + p(a  c) μ(c)

BC (b) → 12 μ(a) + 12 μ(b) + p(b  c) μ(c)

BC (c) → p(c  a) μ(a) + p(c  b) μ(b) + 12 μ(c).

Recall that p(c  b) > 1/2 > p (b  c). Regardless of what p(a  c) = 1 − p(c  a) may be, for any distribution μ with small enough μ(a), μ (c) (and hence large μ(b)), the expected Borda score of 

c will be strictly larger than that of a and b. By concentration, for large enough n, the Borda voting rule will almost surely select c as the winner, and the Borda’s distortion for that μ will be at least 

max x∈A AvgUtil (x)

AvgUtil (c) ≥ AvgUtil (a)

AvgUtil (c) = pA (1 − γ) + pB

pB  + (1 − pA − pB ) (  + ′) . (9) We can now derive lower bounds on the distortion of Borda by defining sequences of parameters 

,  ′, γ (and implicitly, a sequence of corresponding distributions μ), and considering the limit of Eq. (9). In each such sequence, we treat γ as a fixed parameter, but let ′ := 2 and letting  go to 0. As  → 0, it holds that pA → 0 (because its numerator σ(β ) − 1/2 → 1/2 − 1/2 = 0 ), that 

pB → 0 (since it is a constant multiple of pA), and hence both the numerator and denominator of 29 Eq. (9) converge to 0. We apply l’Hôpital’s rule to determine the limit. Treating pA and pB , as well as the numerator num and denominator den of the equation as functions in , we observe that 

p′

> A

(0) = β

4 · (σ(β) − 1/2) 

p′ 

> B

(0) = β · (σ(βγ ) − 1/2) 4 · (σ(β) − 1/2) 2

num ′(0) = β

4 · (σ(β) − 1/2) ·

(

1 − γ + σ(βγ ) − 1/2

σ(β) − 1/2

)

den ′(0) = pB (0) 

︸ ︷︷ ︸ 

> =0

·1 + p′ 

> B

(0) · 0 + (1 − pA(0) − pB (0)) 

︸ ︷︷ ︸

> =1

·(1 + 2 · 0) + 0 · (−p′

> A

(0) − p′ 

> B

(0)) = 1 .

Hence, the limit of Eq. (9) is 

num ′(0) 

den ′(0) = β

4( σ(β) − 1/2) ·

(

1 − γ + σ(βγ ) − 1/2

σ(β) − 1/2

)

= β

21 + e−β

1 − e−β ·

(

1 − γ + σ(βγ ) − 1/2

σ(β) − 1/2

)

,

(10) which means that each 0 < γ < 1 yields a distortion lower bound for Borda that is larger by a factor of 1 − γ + σ(βγ )−1/2 

> σ(β)−1/2

than our algorithm-independent lower bound/the upper bound achieved by NLHF. Since this factor is strictly concave in γ and is equal to 1 for γ → 0 and γ → 1, any value of 

γ will lead to a strictly higher bound. The value of γ that maximizes the bound in Eq. (10) is γ∗ := 2 

> β

arctanh 

(√ 

1 − 4 σ(β)−1/2

> β

)

, which we used to plot Appendix E.2. Since the resulting expression is algebraically unwieldy, we consider the weaker bound for γ = log( β+1)  

> β

, which yields 

β

21 + e−β

1 − e−β

︸ ︷︷ ︸  

> →1as β→∞

·

(

1 − log( β + 1) 

β + 

> 11+1 /(β+1)

− 1/2

σ(β) − 1/2

)︸ ︷︷ ︸  

> →2as β→∞

= (1 − o(1)) β. 

E.3 Algorithm-Independent Lower Bounds Theorem 3 (Voting Rule-Independent Distortion Lower Bound) . Fix any β > 0. If each user provides 

d=1 comparison, no voting rule can guarantee distortion better than β 

> 2

· 1+ e−β 

> 1−e−β

for large m. If each user reports d ≥ 2 pairwise comparisons, any voting rule that puts at most 1/m probability mass on a Condorcet loser must have at least the above distortion. Proof of Theorem 3. To prove this distortion lower bound, we identify a family of social choice problems for which the distortion of any such social choice function converges towards the claimed bound. We will parameterize these instances by the parameters m ≥ 2, 0 <  ≤ 1/2, and 1 ≤ ξ < 2.The instance has m alternatives labeled a, b 1, . . . , b m−1. The distribution D is such that an agent 

i ∼ D has utilities 

(ui(a), u i(b1), . . . , u i(bm−1)) = 

{(1 , 0, . . . , 0) with probability σ(β )−1/2

> σ(β)+ σ(β )−1

(0 , ξ, . . . , ξ ) with probability σ(β)−1/2 

> σ(β)+ σ(β )−1

.Since the bj alternatives have the same utility for any agent, any agent asked to compare two of them will prefer either one with probability 1/2. When ξ = 1 , a randomly drawn rater will prefer alternative a over some alternative bj with probability 

σ(β ) − 1/2

σ(β) + σ(β ) − 1 · σ(β) + σ(β) − 1/2

σ(β) + σ(β ) − 1 · σ(−β )= σ(β )σ(β) − σ(β)/2 + σ(β)(1 − σ(β )) − (1 − σ(β )) /2

σ(β) + σ(β ) − 1= σ(β)/2 + σ(β )/2 − 1/2

σ(β) + σ(β ) − 1 = 1 /2.

30 It is easy to see that the probability of a random agent preferring a over bj is monotone decreasing in 

ξ. The social welfare of a is clearly σ(β )−1/2 

> σ(β)+ σ(β )−1

and the social welfare of any bj is ξ σ(β)−1/2 

> σ(β)+ σ(β )−1

.Fix a voting rule f . If each agent only provides a single pairwise comparison, the voting rule simply observes n independent Bernoulli samples with bias 1/2. For any number of samples n, denote by px

the probability that alternative x will win, where the randomness is taken over the realization of these samples and the randomness in f . By the pigeon-hole principle, some alternative x must be chosen with probability at most 1/m for infinitely many n. Without loss of generality, we can assume that this alternative is a (otherwise, simply permute the roles of the alternatives, which does not change the distribution over observed samples), and we restrict our focus to just the n where pa ≤ 1/m .Now, the expected social welfare achieved by f is at most 

1

m AvgUtil (a) + AvgUtil (b1) = 1/m · (σ(β ) − 1/2) + ξ · (σ(β) − 1/2) 

σ(β) + σ(β ) − 1 .

This shows that the distortion is at least 

AvgUtil (a)

AvgUtil (f ) ≥ σ(β ) − 1/21/m · (σ(β ) − 1/2) + ξ · (σ(β) − 1/2) =

( 1 

> m

+ ξ (σ(β)−1/2) 

> σ(β )−1/2

)−1

. (11) For a sequence of social choice problems in which m → ∞ ,  → 0, and ξ = 1 , this term converges towards 

(

0 + ( σ(β) − 1/2) · lim →0 σ(β )−1/2

)−1

=

(

(σ(β) − 1/2) · 4

β

)−1

= β

21 + e−β

1 − e−β ,

where the first equality follows from l’Hôpital’s rule and the Taylor approximation σ(t) = 1 /2 + 

t/ 4 + O(t3), and the second inequality follows from the identity σ(t) − 1/2 = 11+ e−t − 1/2 =  

> 2−1−e−t
> 2 (1+ e−t)

= 12 · 1−e−t 

> 1+ e−t

. This shows the claimed bound on the distortion of any voting rule. If each agent may provide several pairwise comparisons, the above argument does not work for all voting rules. The reason is that the correlations inside an agent’s comparisons might lead to nonzero covariances that might allow an (arguably unnatural) voting rule to distinguish the special alternative 

a. If the voting rule satisfies some natural social-choice properties, however, the lower bound above goes through by just slightly changing ξ away from 1. Suppose, first, that the voting rule satisfies the probabilistic Condorcet loser criterion, i.e., it will never put more than 1/m probability mass on a Condorcet loser if one exists. If ξ > 1, a random agent prefers a over bj with less than 1/2 probability. As a result, as the number of samples grows large, the probability that a is a Condorcet loser with probability converging to 1. Hence, f cannot put more than 1/m probability mass on a, and the distortion lower bound in Eq. (11) holds. If ξ approaches 1

from above as m → ∞ and  → 0, the distortion bounds converge to the same limit. In the lower bound above, the probabilistic Condorcet loser criterion can easily be replaced by other axioms. If, for example, the voting rule is guaranteed to put at least 1 − 1/m probability mass on a Condorcet winner (if one exists), the proof goes through if we increase only b2’s utility by a factor 

ξ ↘ 1.

## F Supplemental Materials for Section 4 

F.1 Upper Bound for NLHF Theorem 7 (NLHF Distortion Upper Bound) . For any instance D and any m, data distribution μ,temperature β of the Bradley-Terry model, and any reference policy πref and KL budget τ , we have 

dist (NLHF ) ≤ β 

> 2

· 1+ e−β 

> 1−e−β

. In the finite-sample regime, we have 

AvgUtil n(NLHF ) ≥ ( 2 

> β

· 1−e−β

> 1+ e−β

) · max π?∈Bτ (πref ) AvgUtil (π?) − O

( 1

> β

√ log( mn ) 

> n·min {1, d ·μ2min }

+ log( mn )

> n·βμ 2min

)

.

Proof of Theorem 7. We prove this theorem by leveraging the convergence of empirical win-rates in Lemma 10. We first condition on the following successful event, which, according to Lemma 10, 31 holds with probability at least 1 − δ over n samples of preference data, 

∀x, y ∈ A, |pn(x  y) − p(x  y)| ≤ O

(√ 

log( m/δ )

n · min {1, d · μ2min } + log( m/δ )

nμ 2min 

)

:= εn,d (δ).

As argued in the proof sketch, the NLHF policy by definition satisfies 

πNLHF ∈ argmax  

> π1∈Bτ(πref )

min   

> π2∈Bτ(πref )

Ex1∼π1,x 2∼π2 [pn(x1  x2) − pn(x2  x1)] ,

where pn(x1  x2) − pn(x2  x1) describes a Nash-equilibrium strategy for a symmetric two-player zero-sum game, and thus have value 0. Therefore, for π? ∈ Bτ (πref ), it must hold that 

0 ≤ E 

> x1∼πNLHF ,x 2∼π?

[pn(x1  x2) − pn(x2  x1)] = E 

> x1∼πNLHF ,x 2∼π?

[2 pn(x1  x2) − 1] 

Since |pn(x  y) − p(x  y)| ≤ εn,d (δ), we have 

≤ E 

> x1∼πNLHF ,x 2∼π?

[2 p(x1  x2) − 1] + 2 εn,d (δ)

According to the linearization lemma (Lemma 1), we have 

≤ E 

> x1∼πNLHF ,x 2∼π?

[2 β(L · AvgUtil (x1) − `β · AvgUtil (x2))] + 2 εn,d (δ)

≤ 2β(L · AvgUtil (πNLHF ) − `β · AvgUtil (π?) + εn,d (δ)

β ).

Therefore, under the successful event, we can lower bound the welfare of the NLHF policy by 

AvgUtil (πNLHF ) ≥ `β

L AvgUtil (π?) − 4εn,d (δ)

β .

Taking the failure event into account, the expected welfare of the NLHF method is at least 

AvgUtil n(NLHF ) ≥ (1 − δ)

( `β

L AvgUtil (π?) − 4εn,d (δ)

β

)

≥ `β

L · AvgUtil (π?) − O

( εn,d (δ)

β + δ · `β

L

)

Finally, choosing δ = Θ 

( 1√n

)

, we have 

≥ `β

L · AvgUtil (π?) − O

(

1

β

√

log( mn )

n · min {1, d · μ2min } + log( mn )

n · βμ 2min 

)

.

This completes the proof. 

F.2 Lower Bound for PPO-based RLHF and DPO Theorem 6 (RLHF Distortion Lower Bound) . For m ≥ 3, there is a sequence of alignment problems on which the distortion of RLHF scales as eΩ( β) in β.Proof of Theorem 6. Suppose that the instance has m alternatives A = {a, b, c 1, . . . , c m−2}, where 

m−2 ≥ 4eβ . Let the data collection distribution be uniform over all candidates, i.e., μ = Uniform (A).We consider the following distribution D over utility vectors, such that the utility vector of a random agent i ∼ D satisfies 

(ui(a), u i(b), u i(c1), . . . , u i(cm−2)) = 

{(0 , 1, 0, . . . , 0) (type I) with probability δ, ( 1 

> β

, 0, 1, . . . , 1

)

(type II) with probability 1 − δ, 

where δ = 10 10+ eβ = Θ( e−β ). In other words, type I users have a strong preference for candidate b

but only constitute a δ fraction of the population, while type II users have a strong preference for c

and weak preference for a  b and make up for a 1 − δ fraction of the population. For the reference policy and the KL budget, we set πref (a) = πref (b) = 1−ε 

> 2

and πref (ci) = εm−2 for all i ∈ [m − 2] . We leave the choice of ε to be determined later. The KL budget τ is set to be τ = 1 .32 Analysis of the MLE reward. Now we show that when n → ∞ , the MLE reward satisfies 

r(b) − r(a) > 0. According to [ 46 , 42 ], it suffices to show that lim n→∞ BC n(b) − BC n(a) > 0,which, by Lemma 11, is implied by BC ?(b) − BC ?(a) > 0.We have 

BC ?(b) − BC ?(a) = 1

m

> m−2

∑

> i=1

(p(b  ci) − p(a  ci)) + 1

m (p(b  a) − p(a  b)) 

For each ci, we have 

p(b  ci) − p(a  ci) = δ · (σ(β) − σ(0)) + (1 − δ) · (σ(−β) − σ(1 − β)) .

In the above equation, the first term accounts for type-I users and is lower bounded by δ 

> 3

when β ≥ 2.The second term accounts for type-II users, and we leverage the fact that σ(x) is concave when x ≥ 0

to bound it as 

(1 − δ) · (σ(−β) − σ(1 − β)) = − eβ

10 δ · (σ(β) − σ(β − 1)) ≥ − eβ

10 δ · σ′(β − 1) ≥ − e

10 δ, 

where the last step uses σ′(x) = σ(x) · (1 − σ(x)) ≤ 1 − σ(x) ≤ e−x for all x. Plugging both bounds into the limit BC ?(b) − BC ?(a) and substituting δ = 10 10+ eβ ≥ 20  

> m−2

gives 

lim  

> n→∞

BC (b) − BC (a) = BC ?(b) − BC ?(a) ≥ m − 2

m · δ ·

( 13 − e

10 

)

− 1

m ≥ 1

m .

Therefore, when n is sufficiently large, we have BC (b) > BC (a) with high probability, which implies that b is has higher MLE reward than a.As for the MLE reward of type-c candidates, since BC ?(ci) = BC ?(cj ) for all i, j ∈ [m − 2] , we have max i,j ∈[m−2] |r(ci) − r(cj )| → 0 when n → ∞ . In the limit, we can treat all type-c candidates as having the same reward. 

Analysis of the KL-constrained policies. Since all type-c candidates have the same estimated reward and the same probability under the reference policy, both π? and ˆπRLHF will assign the same probability to all type-c candidates. This can be seen by the equivalence between regularized and constrained RLHF as shown in Appendix F.4. As a result, we can view all type-c candidates as a single candidate c which have mass ε under the reference policy. We now show that for any η > 0, there exists an ε > 0 such that any policy π ∈ ∆( {a, b, c }) inside the KL ball Bτ (πref ) cannot put more than η mass on c. We have 

1 ≥ DKL (π ‖ πref ) = π(a) · log π(a)(1 − ε)/2 + π(b) · log π(b)(1 − ε)/2 + π(c) · log π(c)

ε

Fixing π(c), the KL divergence is minimized when π(a) = π(b) = 1−π(c)2 . Substituting this into the KL divergence, we get 

≥ (1 − π(c)) · log 1 − π(c)1 − ε + π(c) · log π(c)

ε

Since t log t ≥ − 1/e for all t > 0, and log 11−ε > 0, we have 

≥ − 2

e + π(c) log 1

ε .

Therefore, any policy in the KL ball must satisfy π(c) log 1 

> ε

≤ 1 + 2 /e ≤ 2, which implies that 

π(c) ≤ 2log(1 /ε ) . We can choose ε to be any constant smaller than e−2/η to ensure that π(c) ≤ η.We then show that when η is sufficiently small, πRLHF puts almost all probability mass on b, whereas 

π? puts almost all probability mass on a. This will ultimately lead to a distortion of 

AvgUtil (π?)

AvgUtil (ˆ πRLHF ) = Θ( AvgUtil (a)) Θ( AvgUtil (b)) = Θ(1 /β )Θ( e−β ) = eΩ( β).

33 • For πRLHF , we assume that the estimated reward is shifted such that r(c) = 0 (as a result, 

r(a) < r (b) < 0). Since π′ = (0 , 1, 0) also satisfies the KL constraint, we have r(πRLHF ) ≥

r(π′). Together with the fact that πRLHF (c) ≤ η, we have 

r(π′) = r(b) ≤ r(πRLHF ) = r(a)πRLHF (a) + r(b)πRLHF (b)

≤ πRLHF (a) · r(a) + (1 − πRLHF (a) − η) · r(b).

Therefore, we have πRLHF (a) ≤ η · |r(b)||r(b)−r(a)| . Setting ε to be sufficiently small, we can guarantee that 

η ≤ η1 := e−β

1 + |r(b)||r(b)−r(a)|

, (12) and thus πRLHF (a) + πRLHF (c) ≤ η

(

1 + |r(b)||r(b)−r(a)|

)

≤ e−β . As a result, we have 

AvgUtil (πRLHF ) = Θ( AvgUtil (b)) .• For π?, a similar argument shows that when 

η ≤ η2 := e−β

1 + AvgUtil (a)

> AvgUtil (a)−AvgUtil (b)

, (13) We have π?(b) + π?(c) ≤ e−β . As a result, we have AvgUtil (π?) = Θ( AvgUtil (a)) .Finally, we set ε to be smaller than e−2/ min {η1,η 2} such that Equations (12) and (13) are both satisfied. This ensures AvgUtil (π?)/AvgUtil (πRLHF ) = eΩ( β) and completes the proof. 

F.3 Equivalence of DPO and RLHF under Heterogeneous Preferences 

In this section, we formalize the observation that DPO and RLHF are equivalent under heterogeneous preferences. This is consistent with the result by Shirali et al. [45] , which shows that DPO also aligns with the Borda count. We start by recalling the DPO objective [43]. 12 

LDPO (π; πref ) = − ∑

> 1≤i≤n, 1≤j≤d

log σ

(

β log π(xji )

πref (xji ) − β log π(yji )

πref (yji )

)

.

Now we perform a change of variables to transform π into the following form: 

π(x) = πref (x) · exp(ˆ r(x)/β ) where ˆr(x) := β log π(x)

πref (x) , ∀x ∈ A. 

Substituting this into the DPO objective, we get: 

LDPO (π; πref ) = − ∑

> 1≤i≤n, 1≤j≤d

log (σ(ˆ r(xji ) − ˆr(yji )) ),

which is exactly the MLE objective for reward learning in RLHF, repeated here for convenience: 

LMLE (r) := − ∑

> 1≤i≤n, 1≤j≤d

log (σ(r(xji ) − r(yji )) ).

Therefore, there is a one-to-one correspondence between the MLE reward r? =argmin r∈Rm LMLE (r)13 , and the DPO policy πDPO = argmin π LDPO (π; πref ) as: 

πDPO (x) = πref (x) · exp( r?(x)/β ).

On the other hand, the RLHF policy with regularization parameter λ (see Appendix F.4 for the equivalence between regularized and constrained versions of RLHF) is also given by 

πRLHF (x) = πref (x) · exp( r?(x)/λ ).

Therefore, the DPO policy πDPO and the RLHF policy πRLHF are equivalent when the parameter β

in the DPO objective is equal to λ in the RLHF objective. Notably, both policies are different from the optimal policy π? ∝ πref · exp( AvgUtil (x)/λ ′) (for a potentially different λ′ that make the KL constraint tight) as r? 6 = AvgUtil , which has also been pointed out by Shirali et al. [45]. 

> 12

Note that the parameter β does not need to be the same as the true temperature of the Bradley-Terry model in our setting. 

> 13

Note that we have a minus sign in the MLE objective, which is equivalent to maximizing the sum of log-likelihoods. 

34 F.4 Equivalence of Regularized and Constrained Alignment Methods 

In this section, we formally establish the equivalence between regularized and constrained formu-lations of both RLHF and NLHF. Although this equivalence is standard and likely known to many, we include the details here for completeness. We begin by proving the equivalence between the two versions of NLHF (which involves max-min optimization over the policy space); the corresponding result for RLHF then follows by analogous arguments. 

Proposition 13 (Equivalence between Constrained and Regularized NLHF.) . Let πτ be the output of the τ -constrained NLHF method defined in Section 2, i.e., 

πτ = argmax  

> π1∈Bτ(πref )

min   

> π2∈Bτ(πref )

E

> x1∼π1,x 2∼π2

[Mx1,x 2 ] , (14) 

and let ˜πλ be the output of the λ-regularized NLHF method [36], i.e., 

˜πλ = argmax  

> π1∈∆( M)

min   

> π2∈∆( M)

E

> x1∼π1,x 2∼π2

[Mx1,x 2 ] − λ · DKL (π1 ‖ πref ) + λ · DKL (π2 ‖ πref ). (15) 

Then, for each λ ∈ [0 , ∞] with solution ˜πλ for Eq. (15) , we have that ˜πλ is also an optimal solution to the τ -constrained optimization problem in Eq. (14) , where τ = DKL (˜ πλ ‖ πref ). Conversely, for each τ ≥ 0 with solution πτ for Eq. (14) , there exists λ ∈ [0 , ∞] such that πτ is also an optimal solution to the λ-regularized optimization problem in Eq. (15) .Proof of Proposition 13. We start by observing that in both games Eq. (14) and Eq. (15), the utilities are anti-symmetric functions, and the strategy spaces for both players are identical, convex and compact. Therefore, the value of the both games is 0, and both games have symmetric Nash equilibria. Now, we prove the two directions of the claim separately. 

Regularized ⇒ Constrained. Given λ ∈ [0 , ∞] and ˜πλ be the solution to Eq. (15). Consider the constrained optimization problem in Eq. (14) with τ = DKL (˜ πλ ‖ πref ). We show that π2 = ˜ πλ is a best response to π1 = ˜ πλ in the constrained game with radius τ = DKL (˜ πλ ‖ πref ), i.e., 

˜πλ = argmin  

> π2∈Bτ(πref )

E

> x1∼˜πλ,x 2∼π2

[Mx1,x 2 ] (16) If Eq. (16) holds, then by the fact that the utility is anti-symmetric, we have that π1 = ˜ πλ is also a best response to π2 = ˜ πλ in the same constrained game. Putting both together, we have that (˜ πλ, ˜πλ)

is a Nash equilibrium for the constrained game with radius τ = DKL (˜ πλ ‖ πref ), thus establishing the first direction. Now we prove Equation (16). To see this, note that ∀π2 ∈ Bτ (πref ), we have that DKL (π2 ‖ πref ) ≤

τ = DKL (˜ πλ ‖ πref ). Therefore, from the fact that ˜πλ is a Nash equilibrium for the regularized game Eq. (15), we have that for any π2 ∈ ∆( M ) and specifically π2 ∈ Bτ (πref ), we have that 

E

> x1∼˜πλ,x 2∼π2

[Mx1,x 2 ] + λ · DKL (π2 ‖ πref ) ≥ E

> x1∼˜πλ,x 2∼˜πλ

[Mx1,x 2 ] + λ · DKL (˜ πλ ‖ πref )

⇒ E

> x1∼˜πλ,x 2∼π2

[Mx1,x 2 ] − E

> x1∼˜πλ,x 2∼˜πλ

[Mx1,x 2 ] ≥ λ · (DKL (˜ πλ ‖ πref ) − DKL (π2 ‖ πref )) ≥ 0.

This proves Eq. (16) and completes the proof of the first direction. 

Constrained ⇒ Regularized. We prove the reverse direction using duality theory. We first show how to construct the regularization parameter λ. For simplicity, we write πT 

> 1

M π 2 as a shorthand for Ex1∼π1,x 2∼π2 [Mx1,x 2 ]. Then minimizing player in the constrained game Eq. (14) with π1 = πτ can be written as 

min  

> π2∈Rm

πT 

> τ

M π 2 s.t. DKL (π2‖πref ) ≤ τ, π 2 ≥ 0, 1Tπ2 = 1 . (Constrained Minimization) The Lagrangian of this problem is 

L(π2, λ, ~ μ, η ) = πT 

> τ

M π 2 + λ (DKL (π2‖πref ) − τ ) − ~μTπ2 + η1Tπ2,

35 where λ, ~ μ, η ≥ 0 are the Lagrange multipliers for the KL divergence constraint, the non-negativity constraint, and the normalization constraint, respectively. Since the utility πT 

> 1

M π 2 is convex, the normalization constraint is affine, and the inequality constraints are convex, and the reference policy πref is strictly feasible with DKL (πref ‖πref ) = 0 < τ ,14 the Slater’s condition is satisfied, which guarantees that the KKT conditions are necessary and sufficient for optimality — there exists parameters λ?, ~ μ?, η ? ≥ 0 such that as an optimal solution to Eq. (Constrained Minimization), 

π2 = πλ satisfies the following KKT conditions: 

∇π2 L(π2, λ ?, ~ μ?, η ?) = M Tπτ + λ? · ∇ π2 DKL (π2‖πref ) − ~μ? + η? · 1 = 0 , (17) where 

η?(1Tπ2 − 1) = 0 and μ?i (π2)i = 0 , ∀i ∈ [m], (18) due to complementary slackness. We will show that this λ? is the regularization parameter we are looking for. Namely, for the regularized game in Eq. (15) with λ = λ?, we have that (πτ , π τ ) is a Nash equilibrium. Again, let us first fix π1 = πτ and consider the regularized optimization problem for the minimizing player: 

min 

> π2

πT 

> τ

M π 2 − λ? · DKL (π2‖πref ) s.t. π2 ≥ 0, 1Tπ2 = 1 . (Regularized Minimization) Since πT 

> τ

M π 2 is convex in π2, Slater’s condition is satisfied for the above problem and implies that the KKT conditions are sufficient for optimality. It is also not hard to see that L(π2, λ ?, ~ μ?, η ?)

coincides with the Lagrangian of (Regularized Minimization) . We can therefore conclude from Eqs. (17) and (18) that for the minimizing player in the regularized game, π2 = πτ is a best response strategy to π1 = πτ .Since the regularized game is anti-symmetric, the same argument shows that for the maximizing player in the regularized game, π1 = πτ is also a best response strategy to π2 = πτ . Together, we have that (πτ , π τ ) is a Nash equilibrium for the regularized game in Eq. (15) with λ = λ?. The proof is complete. Combining Proposition 13 with Theorem 7, we obtain the following guarantee for the KL-regularized version of NLHF: 

Corollary 8. If λ-regularized NLHF (for any λ ≥ 0) returns a policy ˜πNLHF , this policy’s average utility is at least a 2 

> β

· 1−e−β 

> 1+ e−β

fraction of the optimal average utility of any policy π with DKL (π ‖ πref ) ≤

DKL (˜ πNLHF ‖ πref ) (minus finite-sample errors, see Theorem 7). 

For the RLHF case, the proof is analogous, except that we no longer have nested minimization-maximization, so the proof is slightly simpler. We omit the details of proof, but state the result below. 

Proposition 14 (Equivalence between Constrained and Regularized RLHF) . Let r be the MLE reward learned from the comparison data, and let πτ be the output of the τ -constrained RLHF method defined in Section 2, i.e., 

πτ = argmax  

> π∈Bτ(πref )

E 

> x∼π

[r(x)] , (19) 

and let ˜πλ be the output of the λ-regularized RLHF method, i.e., 

˜πλ = argmax  

> π∈∆( M)

E 

> x∼π

[r(x)] − λ · DKL (π ‖ πref ). (20) 

Then, for each λ ∈ [0 , ∞] with solution ˜πλ for Eq. (20) , we have that ˜πλ is also an optimal solution to the τ -constrained optimization problem in Eq. (19) , where τ = DKL (˜ πλ ‖ πref ). Conversely, for each τ ≥ 0 with solution πτ for Eq. (19) , there exists λ ∈ [0 , ∞] such that πτ is also an optimal solution to the λ-regularized optimization problem in Eq. (20) .                    

> 14 If τ= 0 , the only feasible policy is πref , and the claim clearly holds for λ=∞. We also assume that
> πref (a)>0for all a∈M. Otherwise if πref (a) = 0 for some a∈M, then both the regularized and constrained versions forbid any policy to put nonzero probability on a, which leads to an effectively smaller candidate set.

36 G Other Sampling Models 

To prove Theorem 9, we first prove the following lemma. We illustrate the constructed sequence of alternatives in Fig. 4. u1                                                                            

> u2
> u3
> 0.33 0.00 0.21 0.51 0.00 0.22 0.42 0.00 0.18 0.34 0.00 0.15 0.30 0.00
> 0.33 0.49 0.00 0.29 0.51 0.00 0.20 0.39 0.00 0.17 0.33 0.00 0.15 0.29
> 0.33 0.49 0.70 0.00 0.22 0.44 0.00 0.19 0.36 0.00 0.16 0.31 0.00 0.14
> a1a2a3a4a5a6a7a8a9a10 a11 a12 a13 a14
> 0.51 0.52 0.55 0.53 0.53 0.52 0.52 0.51 0.51 0.51 0.51 0.51 0.51
> 0.0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> SW (at) 0.33 0.33 0.31
> 0.27 0.24 0.22 0.21 0.19 0.18 0.17 0.16 0.15 0.15 0.14

Figure 4: Utilities for first 14 alternatives in the sequences constructed in Lemma 15, for β = 5 .Bottom bar chart shows decreasing welfare. Numbers between alternative labels at+1 → at give the expected win-rate p(at+1  at).

Lemma 15. For any β > 0, there is an infinite sequence a1, a 2, . . . of alternatives, and a distribution 

D of utility functions over these alternatives such that 

• AvgUtil (a1) = 1 /3,

• for all t ≥ 2, 0 < AvgUtil (at) ≤ AvgUtil (at−1) − 23 β log 

(

1 + tanh (β/ 4 ·

AvgUtil (at−1))3)

< AvgUtil (at−1), and 

• for all t ≥ 2, p(at  at−1) > 1/2.Proof. Our population D will be a uniform distribution over three utility vectors, u1, u2, and u3. We define the sequence of alternatives and prove the claim by induction over t ≥ 1.For t = 1 , set u1(a1) = u2(a1) = u3(a1) := 1 /3, which clearly satisfies the first claim. Now, let t ≥ 2, and suppose that we have defined the utilities for alternatives a1, . . . , a t−1 and established the claims for all t′ < t . We define utilities for at and extend the claims to t. Let uA

denote the utility vector among u1, u 2, u 3 with the highest utility for at−1, and denote the other two utility vectors by uB , u C . For convenience, set ∆ := uA(at−1) · β and ∆′ := log ( (e∆/2+1) 3

> 2 ( e∆+3)

).

uA(at) := uA(at−1)−∆/β = 0 , uB (at) := uB (at−1)+∆ ′/β, uC (at) := uC (at−1)+∆ ′/β. 

It will be useful to derive an alternative expression for ∆′:

∆′ = log 

( (e∆/2 + 1) 3

2 ( e∆ + 3) 

)

= log 

(

e∆/2 (e∆/2 + 1) 3

2 e∆/2 (e∆ + 3) 

)

= ∆2 − log 2 e∆/2 (e∆ + 3) (e∆/2 + 1) 3 = ∆2 − log (e∆/2 + 1) 3 + ( e∆/2 − 1) 3

(e∆/2 + 1) 3

= ∆2 − log 

(

1 + 

( e∆/2 − 1

e∆/2 + 1 

)3)

= ∆2 − log (1 + tanh(∆ /4) 3) .

Since the value 1 + ( e∆/2−1 

> e∆/2+1

)3 in the logarithm is greater than 1, we know that ∆′ < ∆/2.37 Since AvgUtil (at−1) > 0 by the induction hypothesis, it must hold that ∆ > 0, and, by expanding, that 

∆′ = log (e∆/2 + 1) 3

2 ( e∆ + 3) = log 3 e∆ + 1 + 12 · (e∆/2 − 1) 3

e∆ + 3 > log 3 e∆ + 1 

e∆ + 3 . (21) Since log 3 e∆+1  

> e∆+3

> log e∆+3  

> e∆+3

= 0 , it holds that ∆′ > 0 and that AvgUtil (at) > 0.We first must show that we have not set uB (at) and uC (at) greater than 1. Since, by the induction hypothesis, 13 (uA(at−1) + uB (at−1) + uC (at−1)) = AvgUtil (at−1) ≤ AvgUtil (at−2) ≤ · · · ≤ 

AvgUtil (a1) = 1 /3, it must hold that uA(at−1) + uB (at−1) + uC (at−1) ≤ 1, which by the choice of uA implies that uB (at−1), u C (at−1) are at most 1/2. Since ∆′ < ∆/2 = uA(at−1) · β/ 2 ≤ β/ 2,

uB (at) = uB (at−1) + ∆ ′/β ≤ 1/2 + 1 /2 = 1 , this holds for uB , and analogously for uC .Next, we show the claimed reduction in social welfare using our alternative expression for ∆′.

AvgUtil (at) = 13 · (uA(at) + uB (at) + uC (at)) = 13 ·

(

uA(at−1) + uB (at−1) + uC (at−1) − ∆ − 2 ∆ ′

β

)

= AvgUtil (at−1) − ∆ − 2 ∆ ′

3 β = AvgUtil (at−1) − 23 β log 

(

1 + tanh(∆ /4) 3)

.

By our choice of uA and averaging, it holds that uA(at−1) ≥ AvgUtil (at−1) and hence that ∆ ≥

β · AvgUtil (at−1). Since the bound on AvgUtil (at) above is monotone nonincreasing in ∆, we obtain our claim that 

AvgUtil (at) ≤ AvgUtil (at−1) − 23 β log 

(

1 + tanh (β/ 4 · AvgUtil (at−1))3)

.

Finally, it remains to show that p(at  at−1) > 1/2. Since 

p(at  at−1) = σ(−∆) + 2 σ(∆ ′)3 = 12 + (σ(−∆) − 1/2) + 2 ( σ(∆ ′) − 1/2) 3= 12 + (1 /2 − σ(∆)) + 2 ( σ(∆ ′) − 1/2) 3 ,

it suffices to show that 2 ( σ(∆ ′) − 1/2) > σ (∆) − 1/2. Observing that σ(x) − 1/2 = 12 · 1−e−x 

> 1+ e−x

and applying Eq. (21), we bound 

2 (σ(∆ ′) − 12

) > 2

(

σ( log( 3∆+1  

> e∆+3

)) − 12

)

= 1 − e∆+3 3 e∆+1 

1 + e∆+3 3 e∆+1 

=    

> 2e∆−23e∆+1 4e∆+4 3e∆+1

= 24 · e∆ − 1

e∆ + 1 = 12 · 1 − e−∆

1 + e−∆ = σ(∆) − 12 ,

which establishes our claim. 

Theorem 9 (Unbounded Distortion of RLHF Under Correlated Sampling) . For any β > 0, there exists a sequence of alignment instances and distributions ν ∈ ∆(( A

> 2

)) over comparison pairs such that RLHF’s distortion is unbounded. Proof. We construct our sequence of instances by taking increasingly long prefixes of the sequence in Lemma 15, i.e., by considering the alternatives a1, . . . , a m for increasing m. Rescaling by some constants, we can define the MLE rewards in RLHF as 

r = argmax 

> r∈Rm

∑

> {x,y }∈

(A 

> 2

)#( x  y)

n d log (σ(r(x) − r(y)) ) + #( y  x)

n d log (σ(r(y) − r(x)) ).

Following Siththaranjan et al. [46] , we apply the first-order optimality conditions to obtain that, for each alternative x,

∑ 

> y6=x

#( x  y)

n d = ∑ 

> y6=x

#( x  y) + #( y  x)

n d · σ(r(x) − r(y)) .

38 By the strong law of large numbers, as the number n of samples goes to infinity (regardless of d), the sample fraction #( xy) 

> n d

converges almost surely to its expected value ν({x, y }) · p(x  y). Hence, as n → ∞ , the rewards (a random variable depending on the random pairwise comparisons) will satisfy that ∑ 

> y6=x

ν({x, y }) · σ(r(x) − r(y)) a.s. 

−→ ∑ 

> y6=x

ν({x, y }) · p(x  y). (22) Consider a distribution ν over pairs of alternatives that assigns each pair of adjacent alternatives 

{at, a t+1 } a probability of 1−m−1 of being drawn for comparison, and all other pairs a probability of 

(m 

> 2

)−(m−1) , where  > 0 is a small value, dependent on the current m, to be determined in the following. Applying Eq. (22) to x = am, we obtain that 1−m−1 σ(r(am) − r(am−1)) + O() converges almost surely to 1−m−1 · p(am  am−1) + O(). Since Lemma 15 guarantees that p(am  am−1) > 1/2,for small enough , it will hold almost surely that σ(r(am) − r(am−1)) > 1/2, i.e., that r(am) >r(am−1).Next, we apply Eq. (22) to x = am−1, to obtain that 1−m−1 (σ(r(am−1) − r(am)) + σ(r(am−1) −

r(am−2))) + O() converges almost surely to 1−m−1 · (p(am−1  am) + p(am−1  am−2)) + O().Having established above that, for small enough , we can make σ(r(am−1) − r(am)) = 1 −

σ(r(am) − r(am−1)) arbitrarily close to p(am−1  am) = 1 − p(am  am−1), we see that 

σ(r(am−1) − r(am−2)) must become arbitrarily close to p(am−1  am−2) > 1/2.Continuing this argument for x = am−2, a m−3, . . . , a 1, we obtain that, for small enough , the rewards will be ordered as r(a1) < r (a2) < · · · < r (am) almost surely. Set  (for this specific m)so that this is the case. We set the KL constraint large enough that all policies are possible; say, by choosing the reference policy to be uniform and setting τ = log m.15 Then, the reward-maximizing policy clearly puts all probability mass on the alternative am with maximal reward, obtaining a distortion of AvgUtil (a1) 

> AvgUtil (am)

= 1/3 

> AvgUtil (am)

.We have now defined a sequence of instances, whose distortion grows as 1/3 

> AvgUtil (am)

as m → ∞ .To show that distortion is not bounded in β, it remains to show that AvgUtil (am) → 0. The lemma already tells us that AvgUtil (at) (for t = 1 , 2, . . . ) is a monotonically decreasing sequence. Since the social welfare is nonnegative, the sequence is bounded from below and thus convergent, which also implies that the sequence of differences AvgUtil (at−1) − AvgUtil (at) must converge to 0. Since the bound 23β log(1 + tanh( β/ 4AvgUtil (at−1)) 3) is sandwiched between these differences and 0, it must also converge to 0. Since it is continuous in AvgUtil (at−1) and positive for all positive values of AvgUtil (at−1), this implies that AvgUtil (at−1) must converge to 0. This shows that 

AvgUtil (am) → 0 for large m, and that the distortion grows unboundedly large as m increases, which concludes our proof. 

> 15

This means that this lower bound fits into the social choice subsetting. Note that the theorem does not apply to Borda count (which is not defined for a general distribution ν), but to RLHF considered as a voting rule. 

39