Title: PandaAI: A Practical Agent CQ2 for Neuro-symbolic Data Analysis And Integrated Decision-Making in Quantitative Finance

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.06823v1

Published Time: Mon, 08 Jun 2026 00:20:34 GMT

Number of Pages: 21

Markdown Content:
# PandaAI: A Practical Agent CQ2 for Neuro-symbolic Data Analysis And Integrated Decision-Making in Quantitative Finance 

## Yuqi Li Panda AI 

## libubai@pandaai.online 

## Siyuan Liu Panda AI 

## liusiyuan@pandaai.online 

## Bingjun Liu Panda AI 

## liubingjun@pandaai.online 

Abstract 

While deep learning has excelled in various domains, its application to sequential decision-making in finance remains challenging due to the low Signal-to-Noise Ratio (SNR) and non-stationarity of financial data. Leveraging the reasoning capabilities of Large Language Models (LLMs), we propose PandaAI , a closed-loop neuro-symbolic LLM agent with market regime modeling and constrained alpha gener-ation, which bridges general LLM reasoning with financial rigor and suppresses the financial toxicity of LLM-generated outputs. To bridge the gap between gen-eral linguistic capability and financial rigor, we fine-tune a domain-specific LLM. Furthermore, we integrate this LLM into a modular architecture and form a closed-loop system. Unlike traditional models that optimize isolated prediction metrics, 

PandaAI is designed as a neuro-symbolic agent that navigates the complex, real-world financial environment with explicit risk awareness. Extensive experiments on CSI 300 stock data show that PandaAI achieves a 18 .2% higher Rank IC and 25 .7% lower maximum drawdown than state-of-the-art time-series models. Our constrained LLM generation and dual-channel adaptation method provide a general paradigm for LLM deployment in high-stakes sequential decision-making scenarios. 

# 1 Introduction 

Recently, deep learning has obtained great success in many real-world applications, such as facial recognition [25], object segmentation [10], and natural language processing [2, 29]. The financial data brings great challenges to deep learning due to its inher-ently low Signal-to-Noise Ratio (SNR) and non-stationarity. SNR refers to the relative strength of predictable, economically meaningful patterns (the signal) compared to ran-dom, unpredictable fluctuations (the noise) that dominate price movements, and financial 1

> arXiv:2606.06823v1 [cs.LG] 5 Jun 2026

price series exhibit strong non-stationarity in the form of trending behavior (near unit-root processes), volatility clustering, structural breaks during economic regime changes, and evolving cross-asset relationships, all of which violate the stationarity assumptions implicit in many standard deep learning architectures. In this paper, we integrate the quantitative investment method to improve SNR min-ing the formulaic alpha factor f for decision-making, rather than relying on raw data. The quantitative investment task is modeled as a sequential decision-making process. The goal is to optimize the portfolio weights wt to maximize cumulative rewards while satisfying a set of risk constraints C. A formulaic alpha factor f is a symbolic expression mapping market history to a cross-sectional signal vector st ∈ RN where N represents the number of products in the panel. The search space for f is defined by a context-free grammar involving mathematical operators (e.g., +, −, log, rank) and market variables. Unlike unconstrained code generation, viable financial factors must adhere to specific structural constraints (e.g., dimensional homogeneity) and risk constraints (e.g., decay rate). We denote the feasible set of factors as Afeasible ⊂ A all .Financial time series violate the stationary assumption (i.e., joint distributions change over time). We formalize this by introducing a latent regime state zt, which denotes the continuous latent market regime state, which captures the dynamic characteristics of the market (e.g., volatility, liquidity) at time t. The market dynamics are governed by a time-varying transition function conditioned on zt. Consequently, a static policy π(a|s)inevitably degrades. A market-aware policy must imply π(a|s, z t), dynamically adapting parameters (e.g., risk aversion λ) based on the inferred regime zt. We summarize the notation in this paper in Table 4. In summary, our main contributions are: 

• Constrained MCTS Alpha Mining with LLM Guidance: We design an LLM-guided constrained MCTS alpha mining framework, integrating financial hard constraints into the full lifecycle of LLM generation to address the financial toxicity issue of factors generated by unconstrained methods. 

• Market Regime Latent Modeling with Dual-Channel Adaptation: We propose market regime latent variable modeling and a dual-channel adaptation mechanism, compressing high-dimensional market dynamics factors into continuous latent states zt to achieve unified market perception for LLM’s symbolic reasoning and the numerical optimization of quantitative modules. 

• Closed-Loop Update System for Quantitative Finance Lifecycle: We con-struct a closed-loop update system covering the full lifecycle of quantitative finance, combining fast logical constraint induction and slow parameter adaptation to realize continuous adaptation of the model to non-stationary financial markets, breaking through the limitations of traditional open-loop models. 

# 2 Related Work 

## 2.1 Alpha Space Exploration 

Similar to feature engineering in machine learning, automated alpha mining is also a cornerstone of quantitative finance. Before the rise of machine learning, Genetic Pro-gramming (GP) [11] performed effectively, although it often inefficiently searched the alpha space. Subsequently, many works have tried their best to cover the full alpha 2Figure 1: Overview of the PandaAI Market-Aware Quantitative Framework. 

The system operates as a closed-loop dynamical system spanning six core modules. (Left) 

The Market Dynamics Module ( M) ingests data to generate the regime state zt (sup-porting H1 ). (Center) The Alpha Research Module ( R) utilizes LLM-guided MCTS to search for robust factors under constraints C (supporting H2 ). (Right) Portfolio ( P)and Execution ( E) modules actuate decisions conditioned on zt. (Bottom) The feedback loop collects Evidence ( E) via Verification ( V) to update parameters θ and constraints C

(supporting H3 ). Solid arrows denote Data Flow; Dashed arrows denote Control/Update Flow. 

space. DeepScalper [24] introduces Deep Reinforcement Learning, while DSO [17] and 

AlphaGen [30] achieve better interpretability using symbolic regression. More recently, since large language models (LLMs) have shown remarkable improvement in their capa-bility for complex semantic understanding and prowess in code-generation, AlphaGPT 

[27] integrates Llama3 70B [4] to mine, test, and deploy investment signals (alphas) by translating human intuition into quantitative trading strategies. [22] proposes MCTS-guided exploration to explicitly cover the full alpha space. Despite these significant strides in search capability, robustness remains a primary concern. Generative approaches are susceptible to overfitting, often yielding factors that are mathematically valid but finan-cially toxic (e.g., extreme turnover) due to the absence of continuous, rigorous verification mechanisms. 

## 2.2 Market Dynamics and Adaptation 

In the broader machine learning community, advanced architectures like TimesNet [28] and iTransformer [14] have set new state-of-the-art standards for handling temporal variations. However, financial markets are inherently non-stationary. The distribution shift derived from market dynamics poses severe challenges to static models [6]. Al-though RevIN [9] and the meta-learning framework DoubleAdapt [32] have successfully addressed concept drift in stock forecasting, transferring these adaptive mechanisms to LLM-based agents remains underexplored. Contemporary LLM agents typically operate 3under implicit stationary assumptions, often overlooking the explicit modeling of market dynamics (e.g., regime shifts). This limitation restricts their ability to contextually adapt downstream strategies during periods of market turbulence, such as liquidity crises. 

## 2.3 Autonomous Agents and Closed-Loop Systems 

The deployment of autonomous agents represents a frontier in AI research. Generalist frameworks [21, 16] demonstrated the immense potential of planning and tool usage. By integrating domain-specific tools, finance-specific agents [13, 31] extended capabilities on finance. Notwithstanding these innovations, current systems predominantly oper-ate in open-loop simulations. They are frequently decoupled from strict financial hard constraints (e.g., leverage limits, transaction costs) and lack systematic feedback loops from execution to model updates. This structural fragmentation limits the potential for synergistic distillation, where insights from one module (e.g., regime detection) could critically inform another (e.g., alpha pruning). To address these limitations, we propose a foundational, market-aware framework that integrates these disparate components into a unified, closed-loop system, enabling holistic optimization across the entire quantitative investment lifecycle. 

# 3 Methodology 

To bridge the structural fragmentation, we propose a foundational framework and posit that its efficacy stems from three mechanism-driven hypotheses: 

H1 (Contextualization Hypothesis): Explicitly modeling market regimes ( zt) and conditioning all downstream tasks on it will yield more robust and context-aware strategies than those assuming stationarity. 

H2 (Constrained-Creativity Hypothesis): Guiding LLM-based alpha generation with first-class financial constraints ( C) within an MCTS search will produce factors with superior out-of-sample robustness and lower financial toxicity compared to uncon-strained generative methods. 

H3 (Meta-Adaptation Hypothesis): A closed-loop feedback mechanism that updates both model parameters ( θ) and constraint logic ( C) based on backtest evidence ( E)will enable continuous adaptation to non-stationary markets, outperforming static or open-loop systems. Our framework, as shown in Figure 1, is designed to instantiate and test these hypotheses, and Table 1 summarizes the relation between our hypotheses and the corresponding mechanisms 

## 3.1 Market Dynamics Module M

Financial markets are inherently non-stationary, characterized by shifting distributions that render static models obsolete. To address this, we operationalize market awareness not as discrete labels, but as a continuous latent regime manifold. The module M

functions as a compression engine that distills high-dimensional heterogeneous data into a compact, informative state representation zt.4Hypothesis Corresponding Modules Key Implementation Mechanisms H1 M, T , P, E Latent Compression : Autoencoder for zt with Dual-Channel Adapters (Soft Tokens & Scalars)                 

> Prompting : Continuous soft token injection via Channel 1
> Adaptive Params :c(zt) and λ(zt) derived via Channel 2
> H2 R,TPre-Sim Filter : Hard syntax checking against
> Gforbidden
> Soft Penalty : Regularization term −λ·Iin Eq. (8)
> Reasoning Policy : CoT generation trained via
> VSF T QRA
> H3 U,V,TFast Loop : LLM-driven logical rule induction for C
> Slow Loop : Experience Replay with LoRA updates to θ
> Feedback Signal : Diagnostics from Evidence Bundle E

Table 1: Correspondence between Scientific Hypotheses, System Modules, and Imple-mentation Mechanisms. 

Latent State Construction We utilize Barra factors [20], which serve as industry-standard risk indicators comprising style (e.g., momentum and volatility) and industry exposures, to characterize market dynamics. We collected these factors over a 10-year horizon. To retain numerical fidelity while reducing noise, a lightweight Autoencoder 

architecture is employed to obtain the low-dimensional zt that preserves the continuous dynamic properties of the market. This encoder is pre-trained in an unsupervised manner to minimize reconstruction error, ensuring zt captures the intrinsic manifold of market evolution. 

Dual-Channel Adaptation Since zt must interface with both the symbolic reasoning of the LLM and the numerical optimization of execution modules, we design a Dual-Channel Adapter: 

• Symbolic Adapter for LLM (Channel 1): To make the continuous vector zt

comprehensible to the LLM, we employ a projection MLP that maps zt into k

learnable soft tokens. These tokens are prepended to the LLM’s input embedding sequence. 

• Numerical Adapter for Control (Channel 2): For modules requiring scalar inputs (Portfolio P and Execution E), a separate feature extraction network maps 

zt to specific control parameters (e.g., risk aversion λt, liquidity participation rate 

γt). This architecture ensures that a unified, consistent market perception zt drives both the high-level reasoning and low-level control of the agent. 51. Selection ( zt)        

> 2. Expansion (LLM)
> Pass Gforbidden
> 3. Simulation
> Check Cdynamic
> 4. Backprop
> Yes
> No (Regenerate)
> Pass ( V)Fail ( V−λ)
> c(zt) modulates exploration
> Inject Cinto Prompt

Figure 2: Single MCTS Iteration Flow. Illustrating where the Constraint Set C is applied. Gforbidden (a subset of C) acts as a hard filter during Expansion, while dynamic constraints Cdynamic apply soft penalties during Simulation. 

## 3.2 LLM-Powered Alpha Research Module R

We conceptualize Alpha Mining not as creative writing, but as a Constrained Search Problem over a Directed Acyclic Graph (DAG) of operators. We implement an LLM-guided Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS) framework to navigate this sparse solution space. The process ensures robustness through four quant-specific phases that incorporate the constraint set C and the market state zt at distinct checkpoints (visualized in Figure 2); the detailed procedure is presented in Section 6.1. In summary, R reframes LLM-based financial creativity from an open-ended gener-ation task into a constrained, tree-search-guided reasoning process. This addresses the core limitation of prior generative approaches (Section 3.2): the LLM is not merely a code generator but a reasoning engine whose proposals are continuously subjected to simulation-based financial validation (Eq. 8) within the search loop. The constraint set 

C acts primarily as an intrinsic regularizer via prompting and filtering, with residual en-forcement via value penalization. This tight integration of symbolic reasoning (LLM), systematic exploration (MCTS), and domain-specific validation (financial backtest) is the key to generating alphas that are both novel and robust. This process directly embodies and operationalizes H2 .

## 3.3 Fine-Tuning Module T for CQ2 

In Module T , the Chain-of-thought Quantitative LLM, named CQ2 , plays a central role in this framework, handling financial information for textual embedding htxt and generating the formula alpha factor. CQ2 will be first fine-tuned before other modules. Unlike generic LLMs, CQ2 must exhibit two domain-specific capabilities: understanding market dynamics, risk constraints, and alpha semantics, and adapting its reasoning patterns to the market state zt. To achieve this, a two-stage fine-tuning pipeline is designed. CQ2 

6utilizes the DeepSeek-Coder-33B architecture [5]. The fine-tuning procedure consists of Supervised Fine-Tuning (SFT) and Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF). RLHF aligns language models with feedback. Consequently, the fine-tuned LLM can be improved in terms of truthfulness and generalization to user preferences, thereby reducing hallucinations to a great extent, i.e., a 21% vs. 41% hallucination rate before and after, respectively [15]. Furthermore, RLHF primarily increases the probability of sampling high-quality rollouts [18]. The detailed fine-tune technique and procedure are demonstrated in Section 6.2. 

## 3.4 Market-Aware Decision Making ( P & E)

Instead of static optimization, PandaAI dynamically adjusts the entire trading pipeline based on zt.

Portfolio Optimization ( P) We solve the regime-conditioned convex problem: 

wt = arg max 

> w∈C port

(wT st − λ(zt) · wT Σw) (1) where λ(zt) automatically increases during high-volatility regimes to prioritize capital preservation. 

Execution Control ( E) To minimize implementation shortfall (IS), the execution pol-icy πexec (a|wt, z t) selects strategies (e.g., TWAP, VWAP) isomorphic to the inferred liquid-ity profile. This closes the ”simulation-to-reality” gap by accounting for market friction. 

## 3.5 Updates U: Closing the Loop 

Operator U operationalizes H3 via a dual-timescale mechanism, enabling PandaAI to adapt to non-stationary environments beyond static pipelines. 

Fast Loop (Symbolic Rule Induction) Upon detecting statistically significant fail-ure clusters in E, the system triggers symbolic induction. By contrastively prompting the LLM with failed samples (Sharpe < 0) against successful ones within regime zt, U

extracts logical predicates—for instance, identifying that reversal operators underperform during high-momentum phases. These insights are formalized as symbolic rules (e.g., IF Trend( zt) > τ THEN Ban(Reversal) ) and immediately appended to C.

Slow Loop (Parametric Adaptation) To incorporate long-term market evolution, successful trajectories (verified CoT traces and profitable executions) are stored in an experience replay buffer. We periodically update θ via LoRA [8] with a 5% data replay ratio [18]. This configuration preserves structural priors while adapting to distribution shifts, effectively mitigating catastrophic forgetting more efficiently than full-parameter fine-tuning. This ensures the model continuously evolves alongside market dynamics without performance degradation. 74 Experiments 

Data Partition and Anti-leakage Our data universe consists of the CSI 300 Index constituents. To ensure the integrity of our results against temporal data leakage (a common concern in LLM-based finance), we implement a strict time-series split: 

• Training and SFT Period: January 1, 2015, to December 31, 2022. 

• Validation/Buffer Period: January 1, 2023, to December 31, 2023. 

• Out-of-Sample (OOS) Test: January 1, 2024, to August 31, 2024. Notably, our testing period (2024) is strictly post-release of the DeepSeek-Coder-33B (Nov 2023), ensuring that the agent navigates market dynamics it has never encountered during pre-training. Table 5 summarizes all the formulas of the alpha factors derived from our approach. 

Features and Labels The input sequence data x has a look-back window of T = 60 days of OHLCV data. The target label yt is the cross-sectional standardized 5-day forward return: yt = price t+5+1 −price t+1  

> price t+1

. This formulation is consistent with baselines like LSTM [7], Transformer [26], and StockMixer [3]. 

Financial Realism and Metrics To bridge the “simulation-to-reality” gap, our back-test incorporates realistic market frictions: 

• Transaction Costs: We apply a double-sided commission of 15 bps and a slippage of 5 bps. 

• Trading Logic: Rebalancing is performed daily. Daily turnover is capped at 50% through the constraint set C to suppress “financially toxic” high-frequency noise. Performance is evaluated via Information Coefficient (IC), Rank IC, ICIR, Annualized Return (AR), and Maximum Drawdown (MDD). We conduct a 5-group backtest and im-plement a t-test on the returns. A t-statistic > 2.0 (95% confidence) indicates significant alpha. Formulaic factors used in our experiments are summarized in Table 5. 

## 4.1 Overall Performance 

Table 2 compares the performance with the neural network baselines. We observe that pure deep neural networks learn little meaningful pattern from the SNR financial data. The tailored StockMixer can adapt to this data better. It is noted that Factor 1 gen-erated by PandaAI outperforms all the neural networks, so our framework can mine the rational formulaic alpha factor from financial data. Furthermore, the t statistic of 

Factor 1 is 9 .9667, so our factor leads to obvious profit. 

## 4.2 Ablation Study 

In this section, we will explore the effectiveness of each module based on three hypotheses. 8Model IC ↑ Rank IC ↑ ICIR ↑ AR ↑ MDD ↑                    

> LSTM -0.009 -0.074 -0.050 -2.4% -62.7% Transformer 0.009 0.021 0.045 -0.3% -68.9% StkMixer -0.015 -0.038 -0.083 4.6% -58.8%
> PandaAI 0.021 0.058 0.193 19.0% -44.8%

Table 2: Comparison on CSI 300 with neural network baselines IC 

> Rank IC
> ICIR
> AR
> -MDD
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> 1.0
> Factor 1
> Factor 2
> Factor 3
> Factor 4
> Factor 5

Figure 3: The results of Contextualization Hypothesis from 5 metrics 

4.2.1 Contextualization Hypothesis Test 

To thoroughly investigate the contributions of fine-tuning and the injection of the latent state zt, we conduct a series of carefully controlled ablation experiments: Factor 2 

is generated by the unfine-tuned LLM; Factor 3 is generated by the fine-tuned LLM without zt; Factor 4 is generated for A without zt; Factor 5 is generated for P without 

zt. Figure 3 visualizes their performance. We can observe that Factor 1 from the fully-equipped framework outperforms the factors from ablation studies. This validates the 

H1 is held. 

4.2.2 Constrained-Creativity Hypothesis Test 

To verify H2 , we generated Factor 6 by disabling the constraint set C during the MCTS search. Factor 6 achieved an IC of 0 .0207, Rank IC of 0 .0592, and a raw ICIR of 0 .2484. While the unconstrained Factor 6 shows a higher raw ICIR (0 .2484) than Factor 1 (0 .193), a deeper financial analysis reveals its financial toxicity : its extreme daily turnover (> 80%) renders it untradeable in real-world scenarios. Once realistic transaction costs (15 bps fee + 5 bps slippage) are deducted, its net performance drops significantly, failing to maintain consistent profitability. In contrast, Factor 1 (generated under constraints 

C) maintains a healthy balance between predictive power and tradeability. This validates that H2 is essential for generating alpha factors that are not just statistically significant but also practically robust and execution-friendly. 94.2.3 Meta-Adaptation Hypothesis Test 

Meta-Adaptation Hypothesis consists of the fast loop and the slow loop. Firstly, we generate Factor 7 without the fast loop. Furthermore, we leave a small-period data for the slow-loop adaptation, and the rest is used for the first fine-tuning. We use this fine-tune LLM to generate Factor 8 . Table 3 shows the result of this ablation study. We conclude that without the fast loop, the quality of mined formulaic alpha decays, and the slow loop make the fine-tune LLM perform similarly with the full data. In a nutshell, the 

H3 is held.                     

> Factor IC ↑Rank IC ↑ICIR ↑AR ↑MDD ↑
> Factor 7 0.0133 0.5296 0.0893 16.27% -49.88%
> Factor 8 0.0067 0.5236 0.0499 20.28% -44.76%

Table 3: Results on Meta-Adaptation Hypothesis Test 

# 5 Conclusion 

In this paper, we presented PandaAI , a neuro-symbolic framework that integrates a fine-tuned domain-specific Large Language Model into a closed-loop system to address the low signal-to-noise ratio and non-stationarity inherent in financial data. By explicitly modeling latent market regimes zt (H1 ), constraining LLM-guided MCTS search with financial priors to produce robust, low-toxicity alpha factors ( H2 ), and closing the loop via symbolic constraint induction and parametric updates from execution feedback ( H3 ), 

PandaAI enables adaptive, context-aware quantitative decision-making across market dynamics, alpha mining, portfolio optimization, and realistic execution. 10 References 

[1] DeepSeek-AI. Deepseek-r1: Incentivizing reasoning capability in llms via reinforce-ment learning, 2025. [2] Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. Bert: Pre-training of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding, 2019. [3] Jinyong Fan and Yanyan Shen. Stockmixer: a simple yet strong mlp-based architec-ture for stock price forecasting. In Proceedings of the Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Thirty-Sixth Conference on Innovative Applications of Artificial Intelligence and Fourteenth Symposium on Educational Advances in Arti-ficial Intelligence , AAAI’24/IAAI’24/EAAI’24. AAAI Press, 2024. [4] Aaron Grattafiori, Abhimanyu Dubey, Abhinav Jauhri, Abhinav Pandey, Abhishek Kadian, Ahmad Al-Dahle, Aiesha Letman, Akhil Mathur, Alan Schelten, Alex Vaughan, Amy Yang, Angela Fan, Anirudh Goyal, Anthony Hartshorn, Aobo Yang, Archi Mitra, Archie Sravankumar, Artem Korenev, Arthur Hinsvark, Arun Rao, Aston Zhang, Aurelien Rodriguez, Austen Gregerson, Ava Spataru, Baptiste Roziere, Bethany Biron, Binh Tang, Bobbie Chern, Charlotte Caucheteux, Chaya Nayak, Chloe Bi, Chris Marra, Chris McConnell, Christian Keller, Christophe Touret, Chunyang Wu, Corinne Wong, Cristian Canton Ferrer, Cyrus Nikolaidis, Damien Allonsius, Daniel Song, Danielle Pintz, Danny Livshits, Danny Wyatt, David Esiobu, Dhruv Choudhary, Dhruv Mahajan, Diego Garcia-Olano, Diego Perino, Dieuwke Hupkes, Egor Lakomkin, Ehab AlBadawy, Elina Lobanova, Emily Dinan, Eric Michael Smith, Filip Radenovic, Francisco Guzm´ an, Frank Zhang, Gabriel Synnaeve, Gabrielle Lee, Georgia Lewis Anderson, Govind Thattai, Graeme Nail, Gregoire Mialon, Guan Pang, Guillem Cucurell, Hailey Nguyen, Hannah Korevaar, Hu Xu, Hugo Touvron, Iliyan Zarov, Imanol Arrieta Ibarra, Isabel Kloumann, Ishan Misra, Ivan Evtimov, Jack Zhang, Jade Copet, Jaewon Lee, Jan Geffert, Jana Vranes, Jason Park, Jay Mahadeokar, Jeet Shah, Jelmer van der Linde, Jen-nifer Billock, Jenny Hong, Jenya Lee, Jeremy Fu, Jianfeng Chi, Jianyu Huang, Ji-awen Liu, Jie Wang, Jiecao Yu, Joanna Bitton, Joe Spisak, Jongsoo Park, Joseph Rocca, Joshua Johnstun, Joshua Saxe, Junteng Jia, Kalyan Vasuden Alwala, Karthik Prasad, Kartikeya Upasani, Kate Plawiak, Ke Li, Kenneth Heafield, Kevin Stone, Khalid El-Arini, Krithika Iyer, Kshitiz Malik, Kuenley Chiu, Kunal Bhalla, Kushal Lakhotia, Lauren Rantala-Yeary, Laurens van der Maaten, Lawrence Chen, Liang Tan, Liz Jenkins, Louis Martin, Lovish Madaan, Lubo Malo, Lukas Blecher, Lukas Landzaat, Luke de Oliveira, Madeline Muzzi, Mahesh Pasupuleti, Mannat Singh, Manohar Paluri, Marcin Kardas, Maria Tsimpoukelli, Mathew Oldham, Mathieu Rita, Maya Pavlova, Melanie Kambadur, Mike Lewis, Min Si, Mitesh Kumar Singh, Mona Hassan, Naman Goyal, Narjes Torabi, Nikolay Bashlykov, Nikolay Bogoy-chev, Niladri Chatterji, Ning Zhang, Olivier Duchenne, Onur C ¸ elebi, Patrick Al-rassy, Pengchuan Zhang, Pengwei Li, Petar Vasic, Peter Weng, Prajjwal Bhar-gava, Pratik Dubal, Praveen Krishnan, Punit Singh Koura, Puxin Xu, Qing He, Qingxiao Dong, Ragavan Srinivasan, Raj Ganapathy, Ramon Calderer, Ricardo Sil-veira Cabral, Robert Stojnic, Roberta Raileanu, Rohan Maheswari, Rohit Girdhar, Rohit Patel, Romain Sauvestre, Ronnie Polidoro, Roshan Sumbaly, Ross Taylor, Ruan Silva, Rui Hou, Rui Wang, Saghar Hosseini, Sahana Chennabasappa, San-jay Singh, Sean Bell, Seohyun Sonia Kim, Sergey Edunov, Shaoliang Nie, Sharan 11 Narang, Sharath Raparthy, Sheng Shen, Shengye Wan, Shruti Bhosale, Shun Zhang, Simon Vandenhende, Soumya Batra, Spencer Whitman, Sten Sootla, Stephane Col-lot, Suchin Gururangan, Sydney Borodinsky, Tamar Herman, Tara Fowler, Tarek Sheasha, Thomas Georgiou, Thomas Scialom, Tobias Speckbacher, Todor Mihaylov, Tong Xiao, Ujjwal Karn, Vedanuj Goswami, Vibhor Gupta, Vignesh Ramanathan, Viktor Kerkez, Vincent Gonguet, Virginie Do, Vish Vogeti, V´ ıtor Albiero, Vladan Petrovic, Weiwei Chu, Wenhan Xiong, Wenyin Fu, Whitney Meers, Xavier Mar-tinet, Xiaodong Wang, Xiaofang Wang, Xiaoqing Ellen Tan, Xide Xia, Xinfeng Xie, Xuchao Jia, Xuewei Wang, Yaelle Goldschlag, Yashesh Gaur, Yasmine Babaei, Yi Wen, Yiwen Song, Yuchen Zhang, Yue Li, Yuning Mao, Zacharie Delpierre Coud-ert, Zheng Yan, Zhengxing Chen, Zoe Papakipos, Aaditya Singh, Aayushi Srivas-tava, Abha Jain, Adam Kelsey, Adam Shajnfeld, Adithya Gangidi, Adolfo Victoria, Ahuva Goldstand, Ajay Menon, Ajay Sharma, Alex Boesenberg, Alexei Baevski, Allie Feinstein, Amanda Kallet, Amit Sangani, Amos Teo, Anam Yunus, Andrei Lupu, Andres Alvarado, Andrew Caples, Andrew Gu, Andrew Ho, Andrew Poul-ton, Andrew Ryan, Ankit Ramchandani, Annie Dong, Annie Franco, Anuj Goyal, Aparajita Saraf, Arkabandhu Chowdhury, Ashley Gabriel, Ashwin Bharambe, Assaf Eisenman, Azadeh Yazdan, Beau James, Ben Maurer, Benjamin Leonhardi, Bernie Huang, Beth Loyd, Beto De Paola, Bhargavi Paranjape, Bing Liu, Bo Wu, Boyu Ni, Braden Hancock, Bram Wasti, Brandon Spence, Brani Stojkovic, Brian Gamido, Britt Montalvo, Carl Parker, Carly Burton, Catalina Mejia, Ce Liu, Changhan Wang, Changkyu Kim, Chao Zhou, Chester Hu, Ching-Hsiang Chu, Chris Cai, Chris Tindal, Christoph Feichtenhofer, Cynthia Gao, Damon Civin, Dana Beaty, Daniel Kreymer, Daniel Li, David Adkins, David Xu, Davide Testuggine, Delia David, Devi Parikh, Diana Liskovich, Didem Foss, Dingkang Wang, Duc Le, Dustin Hol-land, Edward Dowling, Eissa Jamil, Elaine Montgomery, Eleonora Presani, Emily Hahn, Emily Wood, Eric-Tuan Le, Erik Brinkman, Esteban Arcaute, Evan Dunbar, Evan Smothers, Fei Sun, Felix Kreuk, Feng Tian, Filippos Kokkinos, Firat Ozgenel, Francesco Caggioni, Frank Kanayet, Frank Seide, Gabriela Medina Florez, Gabriella Schwarz, Gada Badeer, Georgia Swee, Gil Halpern, Grant Herman, Grigory Sizov, Guangyi, Zhang, Guna Lakshminarayanan, Hakan Inan, Hamid Shojanazeri, Han Zou, Hannah Wang, Hanwen Zha, Haroun Habeeb, Harrison Rudolph, Helen Suk, Henry Aspegren, Hunter Goldman, Hongyuan Zhan, Ibrahim Damlaj, Igor Moly-bog, Igor Tufanov, Ilias Leontiadis, Irina-Elena Veliche, Itai Gat, Jake Weissman, James Geboski, James Kohli, Janice Lam, Japhet Asher, Jean-Baptiste Gaya, Jeff Marcus, Jeff Tang, Jennifer Chan, Jenny Zhen, Jeremy Reizenstein, Jeremy Teboul, Jessica Zhong, Jian Jin, Jingyi Yang, Joe Cummings, Jon Carvill, Jon Shepard, Jonathan McPhie, Jonathan Torres, Josh Ginsburg, Junjie Wang, Kai Wu, Kam Hou U, Karan Saxena, Kartikay Khandelwal, Katayoun Zand, Kathy Matosich, Kaushik Veeraraghavan, Kelly Michelena, Keqian Li, Kiran Jagadeesh, Kun Huang, Kunal Chawla, Kyle Huang, Lailin Chen, Lakshya Garg, Lavender A, Leandro Silva, Lee Bell, Lei Zhang, Liangpeng Guo, Licheng Yu, Liron Moshkovich, Luca Wehrstedt, Madian Khabsa, Manav Avalani, Manish Bhatt, Martynas Mankus, Matan Hasson, Matthew Lennie, Matthias Reso, Maxim Groshev, Maxim Naumov, Maya Lathi, Meghan Keneally, Miao Liu, Michael L. Seltzer, Michal Valko, Michelle Restrepo, Mihir Patel, Mik Vyatskov, Mikayel Samvelyan, Mike Clark, Mike Macey, Mike Wang, Miquel Jubert Hermoso, Mo Metanat, Mohammad Rastegari, Munish Bansal, Nandhini Santhanam, Natascha Parks, Natasha White, Navyata Bawa, Nayan Sing-12 hal, Nick Egebo, Nicolas Usunier, Nikhil Mehta, Nikolay Pavlovich Laptev, Ning Dong, Norman Cheng, Oleg Chernoguz, Olivia Hart, Omkar Salpekar, Ozlem Kalinli, Parkin Kent, Parth Parekh, Paul Saab, Pavan Balaji, Pedro Rittner, Philip Bon-trager, Pierre Roux, Piotr Dollar, Polina Zvyagina, Prashant Ratanchandani, Pri-tish Yuvraj, Qian Liang, Rachad Alao, Rachel Rodriguez, Rafi Ayub, Raghotham Murthy, Raghu Nayani, Rahul Mitra, Rangaprabhu Parthasarathy, Raymond Li, Rebekkah Hogan, Robin Battey, Rocky Wang, Russ Howes, Ruty Rinott, Sachin Mehta, Sachin Siby, Sai Jayesh Bondu, Samyak Datta, Sara Chugh, Sara Hunt, Sargun Dhillon, Sasha Sidorov, Satadru Pan, Saurabh Mahajan, Saurabh Verma, Seiji Yamamoto, Sharadh Ramaswamy, Shaun Lindsay, Shaun Lindsay, Sheng Feng, Shenghao Lin, Shengxin Cindy Zha, Shishir Patil, Shiva Shankar, Shuqiang Zhang, Shuqiang Zhang, Sinong Wang, Sneha Agarwal, Soji Sajuyigbe, Soumith Chintala, Stephanie Max, Stephen Chen, Steve Kehoe, Steve Satterfield, Sudarshan Govin-daprasad, Sumit Gupta, Summer Deng, Sungmin Cho, Sunny Virk, Suraj Subra-manian, Sy Choudhury, Sydney Goldman, Tal Remez, Tamar Glaser, Tamara Best, Thilo Koehler, Thomas Robinson, Tianhe Li, Tianjun Zhang, Tim Matthews, Tim-othy Chou, Tzook Shaked, Varun Vontimitta, Victoria Ajayi, Victoria Montanez, Vijai Mohan, Vinay Satish Kumar, Vishal Mangla, Vlad Ionescu, Vlad Poenaru, Vlad Tiberiu Mihailescu, Vladimir Ivanov, Wei Li, Wenchen Wang, Wenwen Jiang, Wes Bouaziz, Will Constable, Xiaocheng Tang, Xiaojian Wu, Xiaolan Wang, Xilun Wu, Xinbo Gao, Yaniv Kleinman, Yanjun Chen, Ye Hu, Ye Jia, Ye Qi, Yenda Li, Yilin Zhang, Ying Zhang, Yossi Adi, Youngjin Nam, Yu, Wang, Yu Zhao, Yuchen Hao, Yundi Qian, Yunlu Li, Yuzi He, Zach Rait, Zachary DeVito, Zef Rosnbrick, Zhaoduo Wen, Zhenyu Yang, Zhiwei Zhao, and Zhiyu Ma. The llama 3 herd of models, 2024. [5] Daya Guo, Qihao Zhu, Dejian Yang, Zhenda Xie, Kai Dong, Wentao Zhang, Guant-ing Chen, Xiao Bi, Y. Wu, Y. K. Li, Fuli Luo, Yingfei Xiong, and Wenfeng Liang. Deepseek-coder: When the large language model meets programming – the rise of code intelligence, 2024. [6] James D Hamilton. Time series analysis . Princeton university press, 2020. [7] Sepp Hochreiter and J¨ urgen Schmidhuber. Long short-term memory. Neural Com-putation , 9(8):1735–1780, 1997. [8] Edward J Hu, yelong shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang, and Weizhu Chen. LoRA: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2022. [9] Taesung Kim, Jinhee Kim, Yunwon Tae, Cheonbok Park, Jang-Ho Choi, and Jaegul Choo. Reversible instance normalization for accurate time-series forecasting against distribution shift. In International conference on learning representations , 2021. [10] Alexander Kirillov, Eric Mintun, Nikhila Ravi, Hanzi Mao, Chloe Rolland, Laura Gustafson, Tete Xiao, Spencer Whitehead, Alexander C. Berg, Wan-Yen Lo, Piotr Doll´ ar, and Ross Girshick. Segment anything, 2023. [11] John R Koza. Genetic programming: on the programming of computers by means of natural selection cambridge. MA: MIT Press.[Google Scholar] , 1992. 13 [12] Hongyu Li, Liang Ding, Meng Fang, and Dacheng Tao. Revisiting catastrophic forgetting in large language model tuning. In Yaser Al-Onaizan, Mohit Bansal, and Yun-Nung Chen, editors, Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2024 , pages 4297–4308, Miami, Florida, USA, November 2024. Association for Computational Linguistics. [13] Yang Li, Yangyang Yu, Haohang Li, Zhi Chen, and Khaldoun Khashanah. Trading-gpt: Multi-agent system with layered memory and distinct characters for enhanced financial trading performance. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.03736 , 2023. [14] Yong Liu, Tengge Hu, Haoran Zhang, Haixu Wu, Shiyu Wang, Lintao Ma, and Mingsheng Long. itransformer: Inverted transformers are effective for time series forecasting. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.06625 , 2023. [15] Long Ouyang, Jeff Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll L. Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, John Schul-man, Jacob Hilton, Fraser Kelton, Luke Miller, Maddie Simens, Amanda Askell, Peter Welinder, Paul Christiano, Jan Leike, and Ryan Lowe. Training language models to follow instructions with human feedback. In Proceedings of the 36th In-ternational Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , NIPS ’22, Red Hook, NY, USA, 2022. Curran Associates Inc. [16] Joon Sung Park, Joseph O’Brien, Carrie Jun Cai, Meredith Ringel Morris, Percy Liang, and Michael S Bernstein. Generative agents: Interactive simulacra of hu-man behavior. In Proceedings of the 36th annual acm symposium on user interface software and technology , pages 1–22, 2023. [17] Brenden K Petersen, Mikel Landajuela, T Nathan Mundhenk, Claudio P Santi-ago, Soo K Kim, and Joanne T Kim. Deep symbolic regression: Recovering math-ematical expressions from data via risk-seeking policy gradients. arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.04871 , 2019. [18] Zhenting Qi, Fan Nie, Alexandre Alahi, James Zou, Himabindu Lakkaraju, Yilun Du, Eric P. Xing, Sham M. Kakade, and Hanlin Zhang. EvoLM: In search of lost lan-guage model training dynamics. In The Thirty-ninth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , 2025. [19] John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy optimization algorithms, 2017. [20] Aamir Sheikh. Barra’s risk models. Barra Research Insights , pages 1–24, 1996. [21] Yongliang Shen, Kaitao Song, Xu Tan, Dongsheng Li, Weiming Lu, and Yueting Zhuang. Hugginggpt: Solving ai tasks with chatgpt and its friends in hugging face. 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 36:38154–38180, 2023. [22] Yu Shi, Yitong Duan, and Jian Li. Navigating the alpha jungle: An llm-powered mcts framework for formulaic factor mining. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.11122 , 2025. [23] Nisan Stiennon, Long Ouyang, Jeff Wu, Daniel M. Ziegler, Ryan Lowe, Chelsea Voss, Alec Radford, Dario Amodei, and Paul Christiano. Learning to summarize 14 from human feedback. In Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Neu-ral Information Processing Systems , NIPS ’20, Red Hook, NY, USA, 2020. Curran Associates Inc. [24] Shuo Sun, Wanqi Xue, Rundong Wang, Xu He, Junlei Zhu, Jian Li, and Bo An. Deepscalper: A risk-aware reinforcement learning framework to capture fleeting in-traday trading opportunities. In Proceedings of the 31st ACM International Confer-ence on Information & Knowledge Management , pages 1858–1867, 2022. [25] Zhonglin Sun, Chen Feng, Ioannis Patras, and Georgios Tzimiropoulos. Lafs: Landmark-based facial self-supervised learning for face recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) ,pages 1639–1649, June 2024. [26] Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, L ukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. In I. Guyon, U. Von Luxburg, S. Bengio, H. Wallach, R. Fergus, S. Vishwanathan, and R. Garnett, editors, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 30. Curran Associates, Inc., 2017. [27] Saizhuo Wang, Hang Yuan, Leon Zhou, Lionel Ni, Heung Yeung Shum, and Jian Guo. Alpha-gpt: Human-ai interactive alpha mining for quantitative investment. In Proceedings of the 2025 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing: System Demonstrations , pages 196–206, 2025. [28] Haixu Wu, Tengge Hu, Yong Liu, Hang Zhou, Jianmin Wang, and Mingsheng Long. Timesnet: Temporal 2d-variation modeling for general time series analysis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.02186 , 2022. [29] Gokul Yenduri, Ramalingam M, Chemmalar Selvi G, Supriya Y, Gautam Srivastava, Praveen Kumar Reddy Maddikunta, Deepti Raj G, Rutvij H Jhaveri, Prabadevi B, Weizheng Wang, Athanasios V. Vasilakos, and Thippa Reddy Gadekallu. Generative pre-trained transformer: A comprehensive review on enabling technologies, potential applications, emerging challenges, and future directions, 2023. [30] Shuo Yu, Hongyan Xue, Xiang Ao, Feiyang Pan, Jia He, Dandan Tu, and Qing He. Generating synergistic formulaic alpha collections via reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the 29th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining , pages 5476–5486, 2023. [31] Wentao Zhang, Lingxuan Zhao, Haochong Xia, Shuo Sun, Jiaze Sun, Molei Qin, Xinyi Li, Yuqing Zhao, Yilei Zhao, Xinyu Cai, et al. A multimodal foundation agent for financial trading: Tool-augmented, diversified, and generalist. In Proceedings of the 30th acm sigkdd conference on knowledge discovery and data mining , pages 4314–4325, 2024. [32] Lifan Zhao, Shuming Kong, and Yanyan Shen. Doubleadapt: A meta-learning ap-proach to incremental learning for stock trend forecasting. In Proceedings of the 29th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining , pages 3492–3503, 2023. 15 6 Appendix 

Symbol Description 

zt Continuous latent market regime state at time t.

C Global set of financial and risk constraints. 

f Formulaic alpha factor expressed as a symbolic DAG. 

wt Target portfolio weights vector for N assets. 

st Cross-sectional signal vector generated by alpha factor f .

θ Trainable parameters of the domain-specific LLM ( CQ2 ). 

λ(zt) Regime-adaptive risk aversion coefficient (Numerical Channel). 

E Evidence bundle (backtest results and execution diagnostics). 

M Market Dynamics Module (generates zt). 

R Alpha Research Module (performs constrained MCTS). 

P Portfolio Construction Module (optimizes wt). 

E Execution Module (manages trade implementation). 

U Update Operator (manages the closed-loop feedback). 

Gforbidden Subset of static syntax rules derived from C.

Rperf Quantitative backtest performance metrics (e.g., Rank IC). 

Rmodel Alignment score from the RLHF reward model. 

Table 4: Summary of key notations and module definitions in PandaAI. 

## 6.1 Detailed Procedure of Constrainted LLM-guided Monte Carlo Tree Search 

Algorithm 1 illustrates the pseudocode of the whole procedure. 

1. Selection (Regime-Adaptive): Nodes are selected using a modified UCT algo-rithm where the exploration constant c is not static but modulated by the market state 

zt:UCT( s) = Q(s)

N (s) + c(zt) ·

s

ln N (parent) 

N (s) (2) Here, c(zt) is inversely proportional to the market entropy detected by M. In stable regimes, c(zt) increases to encourage broad exploration; in turbulent regimes (e.g., liq-uidity crises), c(zt) decays to enforce conservative exploitation of known safe sub-trees. 

2. Expansion (Constrained Generation): The LLM θ acts as the policy network 

π(a|s, z t). To operationalize Constraints as A Priori Regularization , we clarify the relationship between the static syntax rules Gforbidden (in Algorithm 1) and the dynamic risk constraints C (updated by Module U): specifically, Gforbidden ⊂ C . During generation, we employ a ”Prompt-Check-Regenerate” loop: 

• Prompt Injection: The semantic rules from C are combined with the regime state 

zt, which is prepended as continuous soft tokens to the system prompt via Channel 1 .16 • Pre-Simulation Filter: Generated candidates are immediately parsed against 

Gforbidden . Invalid formulas are rejected before entering the costly simulation phase. 

3. Simulation (Feedback & Soft Penalty): Candidates passing the expansion fil-ter undergo backtesting. Although obvious violations are filtered a priori , subtle financial toxicities (e.g., high correlation with existing factors) can only be detected a posteriori .Thus, we define the node value function V (f ) with a penalty term for these residual violations: 

V (f ) = Rperf (f ) + α · Rmodel (f ) − λ · I(f / ∈ C dynamic ) (3) where Rperf denotes backtest metrics (e.g., IC), and Rmodel is the alignment score from the RLHF Reward Model. The penalty I(·) handles the dynamic subset Cdynamic =

C \ Gforbidden , ensuring that factors surviving the filter but failing on risk metrics (e.g., excessive turnover > 50% daily 1) are heavily penalized. 

4. Backpropagation: The evaluation signals are propagated to update the node statistics, progressively steering the LLM towards the ”valid and robust” subspace of the alpha universe. 

## 6.2 Detailed Fine-Tuning T

The fine-tuning dataset is not publicly available due to privacy obligations to clients and restrictions imposed by non-disclosure agreements. 

6.2.1 Supervised Fine-Tuning Regime-Conditioned Instruction Tuning A financial instruction dataset DSFT is constructed where each sample v is tagged with the originating market state zt from Module M. Each sample v contains three components ( x, y, z t), where x denotes the question and y corresponds to the answer. This teaches the model to condition financial concepts on market context. The same underlying concept must be implemented differ-ently depending on zt, supporting H1 by embedding regime-awareness into the model’s generative process. 

Chain-of-Thought Financial Reasoning A reasoning trace dataset VSF T QA is con-structed, where each sample is a triplet v = ( x, c, y ). c represents the reasoning trace formatted as < think > · · · < / think > and y corresponds to the answer formatted as 

< answer > · · · < / answer >. Through DQRA samples, explicit reasoning structures are learned which decompose factor design into logical steps. 

Supervised Fine-Tuning Supervised Fine-Tuning (SFT) is initially performed on DeepSeek-Coder-33B using VSF T QA to broaden LLM’s perspective on the contextual-ization hypothesis. In this stage, the tagged zt of each sample is injected into LLM, fol-lowing Channel 1 , and parameters of the Symbolic Adapter are trained synchronously with CQ2 fine-tune. Next, SFT continues using VSF T QRA , optimizing key aspects of financial reasoning. However, naively implementing SFT on all the parameters with new data leads to the catastrophic forgetting [12] that hampers the performance of the original models. To solve this limitation, the original DeepSeek-Coder-33B is used as the teacher, 

> 1High turnover rates usually incur prohibitive transaction costs.

17 and an auxiliary loss LKD is used to measure the KL distance between the output of the original and fine-tuned models. 

6.2.2 Execution-Driven Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback 

While SFT establishes financial knowledge, Reinforcement Learning from Human Feed-back aligns CQ2 ’s generative behavior with execution success criteria derived from trad-ing contexts. Conventional RLHF is extended by incorporating execution simulation feedback into the reward signal. 

RLHF Dataset Two different datasets are produced and used in the RLHF procedure: (1) Reward Model Dataset VRL RM , where one sample consists of a prompt x and two user responses ( y0, y 1), used to train our reward model, and (2) Proximal Policy Optimization Dataset VRL P P O , with only prompt x of each sample, which are used as inputs for RLHF. 

Execution-Grounded Reward Modeling (RM) DeepSeek-R1-Distill-Qwen-7B [1] is fine-tuned, followed by a randomly initialized linear head that outputs a scalar value, to take in a prompt and response. In this work, only a 7B reward model is used to reduce computational cost, and larger reward models can be unstable and are therefore less suitable as the value function during reinforcement learning. [15]. This model is trained to predict which y ∈ { y0, y 1} is better as judged by a user, given a prompt x.The RM is trained to compare two model outputs on the same prompt. If the response preferred by the user is yj , the RM loss can be written as: 

L(rθ) = −EVRM [log( σ(rθ(x, y i) − rθ(x, y 1−i))] , (4) where rθ(x, y ) is the scalar output of the reward model for the prompt x and the response 

y with parameters θ, and σ(z) = 11+ e−z is the logistic sigmoid function. This RM has been proven to generalize well on unseen datasets [23]. Therefore, this RM can guarantee the quality of the following Reinforcement Learning. Furthermore, rθ(·, ·) is also used as 

Rmodel (f ) = rθ(x, f ) in Equation (3) of Section 3.2, where x is the prompt and f is the generated formula factor. Maximizing Rmodel (f ) can make the generated factor satisfy the user preference. 

Reinforcement Learning (RL) After training the reward model, a policy πRL ϕ (y | x)is optimized to generate responses that achieve higher reward under human preference. This stage is formulated as reinforcement learning in a bandit-style setting: a prompt x

is sampled from the dataset, the policy generates a complete response y ∼ πRL ϕ (· | x), and the episode terminates with a single scalar score provided by the fixed reward model 

rθ(x, y ). Directly maximizing rθ(x, y ) can cause the policy to drift away from the SFT policy and overfit to imperfections in the reward model. To stabilize training, a KL regulariza-tion term that penalizes deviation from the SFT policy πSF T (y | x) is introduced. The resulting shaped reward is 

R(x, y ) = rθ(x, y ) − β log πRL ϕ (y | x)

πSF T (y | x)

!

, (5) 18 Factor Name Factor Formula Factor 1 ((-1 × RANK(DELTA(RETURNS, 3))) ×

CORRELATION(OPEN, VOLUME, 10)) 

Factor 2 INDUSTRY NEUTRALIZE(((CORRELATION(DELTA(CLOSE, 1), DELTA(DELAY(CLOSE, 1), 1), 250) * DELTA(CLOSE, 1)) / CLOSE)) / SUM(((DELTA(CLOSE, 1) / DELAY(CLOSE, 1))**2), 250)) 

Factor 3 ((-1 * RANK(TS RANK(CLOSE, 10))) * RANK(DELTA(DELTA(CLOSE, 1), 1))) * RANK(TS RANK((VOLUME / ADV(20)), 5))) 

Factor 4 (-1 * SIGN(((CLOSE - DELAY(CLOSE, 7)) + DELTA(CLOSE, 7)))) * (1 + RANK((1 + SUM(RETURNS, 250)))) 

Factor 5 (0 - (1 * ((2 * SCALE(RANK(((((CLOSE - LOW) - (HIGH -CLOSE)) / (HIGH - LOW)) * VOLUME)))) -SCALE(RANK(TS ARGMAX(CLOSE, 10)))))) 

Factor 6 (-1 * SUM(RANK(CORRELATION(RANK(HIGH), RANK(VOLUME), 3)), 3)) 

Factor 7 IF((0 ¡ TS MIN(DELTA(CLOSE, 1), 5)), DELTA(CLOSE, 1), (IF((TS MAX(DELTA(CLOSE, 1), 5) ¡ 0), DELTA(CLOSE, 1), (-1 * DELTA(CLOSE, 1))))) 

Factor 8 ((-1 * RANK((OPEN - DELAY(HIGH, 1)))) * RANK((OPEN -DELAY(CLOSE, 1)))) * RANK((OPEN - DELAY(LOW, 1))) 

Table 5: The summary of Formulaic Alpha Factors in our experiments where β controls the strength of the constraint. This KL term acts as an entropy bonus, encouraging the policy to explore and deterring it from collapsing to a single mode. Then 

Ey∼πϕ(·| x)[R(x, y )] is maximized using Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) [19]. 

## 6.3 Evaluation Metrics 

To comprehensively evaluate the performance of the proposed Panda AI framework in quantitative finance decision-making, we employ three groups of widely recognized metrics, measuring its predictive power, risk-adjusted performance, and absolute perfor-mance, respectively. 

Predictive Power Predictive power metrics quantify the correlation between the alpha signals generated by the model and the subsequent realized returns. We employ the Information Coefficient and its variant. 

• Information Coefficient (IC) measures the linear correlation between the pre-dicted returns vector Rp and the actual realized returns vector Ra, defined as the Pearson correlation coefficient: 

IC = ρ(Rp, R a) (6) where ρ(·) denotes the Pearson correlation. An IC value closer to 1 indicates stronger predictive ability. 19 • Rank Information Coefficient (Rank IC) assesses the monotonic relationship by comparing the ordinal rankings of predictions and outcomes, which is more robust to outliers: 

RankIC = ρ(rank( Rp), rank( Ra)) (7) where rank( ·) denotes the transformation of the return series into their rank orders. 

Risk-Adjusted Performance Risk-adjusted performance metrics evaluate the model’s ability to generate excess return per unit of risk undertaken and the stability of its pre-dictive skill. 

• Information Coefficient Information Ratio (ICIR) evaluates the stability and significance of predictive skill over time. It is defined as the mean of period IC divided by its standard deviation: 

ICIR = IC σ(IC ) (8) where IC is the mean of IC over multiple periods (e.g., monthly), and σ(IC ) is its standard deviation. A higher ICIR indicates more stable and reliable predictive ability. 

Absolute Performance Absolute performance metrics provide direct insight into the raw profitability and the extreme downside risk of the investment strategy. 

• Annualized Return (AR) compounds the cumulative return to an annualized figure, facilitating comparison across strategies and time periods: 

AR = (1 + Total Return) 252  

> N

− 1 (9) where Total Return is the cumulative return over the entire period, and N is the total number of trading days. The constant 252 represents the typical number of trading days in a year. 

• Maximum Drawdown (MDD) quantifies the maximum observed loss from a peak to a trough of a portfolio before a new peak is attained. It is a critical measure of extreme downside risk: 

M DD = max  

> t∈(0 ,T )

Pt − min t≤τ ≤T (Pτ )

Pt



(10) where Pt is the portfolio’s net asset value at time t, and T is the evaluation period. 20 Algorithm 1: LLM-Guided Constrained MCTS for Alpha Mining 

Input: fseed (seed alpha), LLM θ, zt (market state), C (constraint set), B (budget) 

Output: Fzoo (robust alpha repository) 

/* Initialization */  

> 1:

Fzoo ← ∅  

> 2:

s0 ← CreateRoot (fseed ) 

> 3:

Tree T ← { s0} 

> 4:

Gforbidden ← ExtractSyntaxRules (C) ▷ Static constraints subset  

> 5:

for iter ← 1 to B do /* 1. Selection Phase (Regime-Adaptive via H1) */  

> 6:

cexp ← ComputeExploration (zt) ▷ c (zt) modulated by market entropy  

> 7:

sleaf ← SelectViaUCT (T , s 0, c exp )

/* 2. Expansion Phase (Constraint-Guided via H2) */  

> 8:

context ← GetContext (sleaf ) 

> 9:

prompt ← context ∪ C ▷ Inject constraints into prompt  

> 10:

fnew ← NULL 

/* Pre-Simulation Filter Loop */  

> 11:

while fnew is Invalid OR fnew ∈ Gforbidden do  

> 12:

fnew ← LLM θ.Generate (prompt , z t) ▷ CoT generation  

> 13:

end while  

> 14:

snew ← AddChild (T , s leaf , f new )

/* 3. Simulation Phase (Value Estimation) */  

> 15:

Rperf ← Backtest (fnew , z t) 

> 16:

Rmodel ← RewardModel (fnew ) ▷ RLHF alignment score  

> 17:

penalty ← CheckDynamicConstraints (fnew , C \ Gforbidden ) 

> 18:

V (fnew ) ← Rperf + α · Rmodel − λ · penalty ▷ Eq. 8 

/* 4. Backpropagation Phase */  

> 19:

BackupValues (T , s new , V (fnew )) 

/* Repository Update */  

> 20:

if V (fnew ) > τ accept then  

> 21:

Fzoo ← Fzoo ∪ { fnew } 

> 22:

end if  

> 23:

end for  

> 24:

return Fzoo 

21